MOCKINGJAY
SUZANNE COLLINS

PART I
"THE ASHES"
1
I stare down at my shoes, watching as a fine layer of
ash settles on the worn leather. This is where the bed I
shared with my sister, Prim, stood. Over there was the
kitchen table. The bricks of the chimney, which collapsed in
a charred heap, provide a point of reference for the rest of
the house. How else could I orient myself in this sea of
gray?
Almost nothing remains of District 12. A month ago,
the Capitol's firebombs obliterated the poor coal miners'
houses in the Seam, the shops in the town, even the Justice
Building. The only area that escaped incineration was the
Victor's Village. I don't know why exactly. Perhaps so
anyone forced to come here on Capitol business would
have somewhere decent to stay. The odd reporter. A
committee assessing the condition of the coal mines. A
squad of Peacekeepers checking for returning refugees.
But no one is returning except me. And that's only for a
brief visit. The authorities in District 13 were against my
coming back. They viewed it as a costly and pointless
venture, given that at least a dozen invisible hovercraft are
circling overhead for my protection and there's no
intelligence to be gained. I had to see it, though. So much
so that I made it a condition of my cooperating with any of
their plans.
Finally, Plutarch Heavensbee, the Head Gamemaker
who had organized the rebels in the Capitol, threw up his
hands. "Let her go. Better to waste a day than another
month. Maybe a little tour of Twelve is just what she needs
to convince her we're on the same side."
The same side. A pain stabs my left temple and I
press my hand against it. Right on the spot where Johanna
Mason hit me with the coil of wire. The memories swirl as I
try to sort out what is true and what is false. What series of
events led me to be standing in the ruins of my city? This is
hard because the effects of the concussion she gave me
haven't completely subsided and my thoughts still have a
tendency to jumble together. Also, the drugs they use to
control my pain and mood sometimes make me see things.
I guess. I'm still not entirely convinced that I was
hallucinating the night the floor of my hospital room
transformed into a carpet of writhing snakes.
I use a technique one of the doctors suggested. I start
with the simplest things I know to be true and work toward
the more complicated. The list begins to roll in my head....
My name is Katniss Everdeen. I am seventeen years
old. My home is District 12. I was in the Hunger Games. I
escaped. The Capitol hates me. Peeta was taken
prisoner. He is thought to be dead. Most likely he is dead.
It is probably best if he is dead....
"Katniss. Should I come down?" My best friend Gale's
voice reaches me through the headset the rebels insisted I
wear. He's up in a hovercraft, watching me carefully, ready
to swoop in if anything goes amiss. I realize I'm crouched
down now, elbows on my thighs, my head braced between
my hands. I must look on the verge of some kind of
breakdown. This won't do. Not when they're finally weaning
me off the medication.
I straighten up and wave his offer away. "No. I'm fine."
To reinforce this, I begin to move away from my old house
and in toward the town. Gale asked to be dropped off in 12
with me, but he didn't force the issue when I refused his
company. He understands I don't want anyone with me
today. Not even him. Some walks you have to take alone.
The summer's been scorching hot and dry as a bone.
There's been next to no rain to disturb the piles of ash left
by the attack. They shift here and there, in reaction to my
footsteps. No breeze to scatter them. I keep my eyes on
what I remember as the road, because when I first landed in
the Meadow, I wasn't careful and I walked right into a rock.
Only it wasn't a rock--it was someone's skull. It rolled over
and over and landed faceup, and for a long time I couldn't
stop looking at the teeth, wondering whose they were,
thinking of how mine would probably look the same way
under similar circumstances.
I stick to the road out of habit, but it's a bad choice,
because it's full of the remains of those who tried to flee.
Some were incinerated entirely. But others, probably
overcome with smoke, escaped the worst of the flames and
now lie reeking in various states of decomposition, carrion
for scavengers, blanketed by flies. I killed you, I think as I
pass a pile. And you. And you.
Because I did. It was my arrow, aimed at the chink in
the force field surrounding the arena, that brought on this
firestorm of retribution. That sent the whole country of
Panem into chaos.
In my head I hear President Snow's words, spoken the
morning I was to begin the Victory Tour. "Katniss
Everdeen, the girl who was on fire, you have provided a
spark that, left unattended, may grow to an inferno that
destroys Panem." It turns out he wasn't exaggerating or
simply trying to scare me. He was, perhaps, genuinely
attempting to enlist my help. But I had already set
something in motion that I had no ability to control.
Burning. Still burning, I think numbly. The fires at the
coal mines belch black smoke in the distance. There's no
one left to care, though. More than ninety percent of the
district's population is dead. The remaining eight hundred
or so are refugees in District 13--which, as far as I'm
concerned, is the same thing as being homeless forever.
I know I shouldn't think that; I know I should be grateful
for the way we have been welcomed. Sick, wounded,
starving, and empty-handed. Still, I can never get around
the fact that District 13 was instrumental in 12's destruction.
This doesn't absolve me of blame--there's plenty of blame
to go around. But without them, I would not have been part
of a larger plot to overthrow the Capitol or had the
wherewithal to do it.
The citizens of District 12 had no organized resistance
movement of their own. No say in any of this. They only had
the misfortune to have me. Some survivors think it's good
luck, though, to be free of District 12 at last. To have
escaped the endless hunger and oppression, the perilous
mines, the lash of our final Head Peacekeeper, Romulus
Thread. To have a new home at all is seen as a wonder
since, up until a short time ago, we hadn't even known that
District 13 still existed.
The credit for the survivors' escape has landed
squarely on Gale's shoulders, although he's loath to accept
it. As soon as the Quarter Quell was over--as soon as I had
been lifted from the arena--the electricity in District 12 was
cut, the televisions went black, and the Seam became so
silent, people could hear one another's heartbeats. No one
did anything to protest or celebrate what had happened in
the arena. Yet within fifteen minutes, the sky was filled with
hoverplanes and the bombs were raining down.
It was Gale who thought of the Meadow, one of the few
places not filled with old wooden homes embedded with
coal dust. He herded those he could in its direction,
including my mother and Prim. He formed the team that
pulled down the fence--now just a harmless chain-link
barrier, with the electricity off--and led the people into the
woods. He took them to the only place he could think of, the
lake my father had shown me as a child. And it was from
there they watched the distant flames eat up everything they
knew in the world.
By dawn the bombers were long gone, the fires dying,
the final stragglers rounded up. My mother and Prim had
set up a medical area for the injured and were attempting
to treat them with whatever they could glean from the
woods. Gale had two sets of bows and arrows, one hunting
knife, one fishing net, and over eight hundred terrified
people to feed. With the help of those who were ablebodied,
they managed for three days. And that's when the
hovercraft unexpectedly arrived to evacuate them to District
13, where there were more than enough clean, white living
compartments, plenty of clothing, and three meals a day.
The compartments had the disadvantage of being
underground, the clothing was identical, and the food was
relatively tasteless, but for the refugees of 12, these were
minor considerations. They were safe. They were being
cared for. They were alive and eagerly welcomed.
This enthusiasm was interpreted as kindness. But a
man named Dalton, a District 10 refugee who'd made it to
13 on foot a few years ago, leaked the real motive to me.
"They need you. Me. They need us all. Awhile back, there
was some sort of pox epidemic that killed a bunch of them
and left a lot more infertile. New breeding stock. That's how
they see us." Back in 10, he'd worked on one of the beef
ranches, maintaining the genetic diversity of the herd with
the implantation of long-frozen cow embryos. He's very
likely right about 13, because there don't seem to be nearly
enough kids around. But so what? We're not being kept in
pens, we're being trained for work, the children are being
educated. Those over fourteen have been given entry-level
ranks in the military and are addressed respectfully as
"Soldier." Every single refugee was granted automatic
citizenship by the authorities of 13.
Still, I hate them. But, of course, I hate almost
everybody now. Myself more than anyone.
The surface beneath my feet hardens, and under the
carpet of ash, I feel the paving stones of the square. Around
the perimeter is a shallow border of refuse where the shops
stood. A heap of blackened rubble has replaced the
Justice Building. I walk to the approximate site of the
bakery Peeta's family owned. Nothing much left but the
melted lump of the oven. Peeta's parents, his two older
brothers--none of them made it to 13. Fewer than a dozen
of what passed for District 12's well-to-do escaped the fire.
Peeta would have nothing to come home to, anyway.
Except me...
I back away from the bakery and bump into something,
lose my balance, and find myself sitting on a hunk of sunheated
metal. I puzzle over what it might have been, then
remember Thread's recent renovations of the square.
Stocks, whipping posts, and this, the remains of the
gallows. Bad. This is bad. It brings on the flood of images
that torments me, awake or asleep. Peeta being tortured--
drowned, burned, lacerated, shocked, maimed, beaten--as
the Capitol tries to get information about the rebellion that
he doesn't know. I squeeze my eyes shut and try to reach
for him across the hundreds and hundreds of miles, to send
my thoughts into his mind, to let him know he is not alone.
But he is. And I can't help him.
Running. Away from the square and to the one place
the fire did not destroy. I pass the wreckage of the mayor's
house, where my friend Madge lived. No word of her or her
family. Were they evacuated to the Capitol because of her
father's position, or left to the flames? Ashes billow up
around me, and I pull the hem of my shirt up over my mouth.
It's not wondering what I breathe in, but who, that threatens
to choke me.
The grass has been scorched and the gray snow fell
here as well, but the twelve fine houses of the Victor's
Village are unscathed. I bolt into the house I lived in for the
past year, slam the door closed, and lean back against it.
The place seems untouched. Clean. Eerily quiet. Why did I
come back to 12? How can this visit help me answer the
question I can't escape?
"What am I going to do?" I whisper to the walls.
Because I really don't know.
People keep talking at me, talking, talking, talking.
Plutarch Heavensbee. His calculating assistant, Fulvia
Cardew. A mishmash of district leaders. Military officials.
But not Alma Coin, the president of 13, who just watches.
She's fifty or so, with gray hair that falls in an unbroken
sheet to her shoulders. I'm somewhat fascinated by her
hair, since it's so uniform, so without a flaw, a wisp, even a
split end. Her eyes are gray, but not like those of people
from the Seam. They're very pale, as if almost all the color
has been sucked out of them. The color of slush that you
wish would melt away.
What they want is for me to truly take on the role they
designed for me. The symbol of the revolution. The
Mockingjay. It isn't enough, what I've done in the past,
defying the Capitol in the Games, providing a rallying point.
I must now become the actual leader, the face, the voice,
the embodiment of the revolution. The person who the
districts--most of which are now openly at war with the
Capitol--can count on to blaze the path to victory. I won't
have to do it alone. They have a whole team of people to
make me over, dress me, write my speeches, orchestrate
my appearances--as if that doesn't sound horribly familiar--
and all I have to do is play my part. Sometimes I listen to
them and sometimes I just watch the perfect line of Coin's
hair and try to decide if it's a wig. Eventually, I leave the
room because my head starts to ache or it's time to eat or if
I don't get aboveground I might start screaming. I don't
bother to say anything. I simply get up and walk out.
Yesterday afternoon, as the door was closing behind
me, I heard Coin say, "I told you we should have rescued
the boy first." Meaning Peeta. I couldn't agree more. He
would've been an excellent mouthpiece.
And who did they fish out of the arena instead? Me,
who won't cooperate. Beetee, an older inventor from 3, who
I rarely see because he was pulled into weapons
development the minute he could sit upright. Literally, they
wheeled his hospital bed into some top secret area and
now he only occasionally shows up for meals. He's very
smart and very willing to help the cause, but not really
firebrand material. Then there's Finnick Odair, the sex
symbol from the fishing district, who kept Peeta alive in the
arena when I couldn't. They want to transform Finnick into a
rebel leader as well, but first they'll have to get him to stay
awake for more than five minutes. Even when he is
conscious, you have to say everything to him three times to
get through to his brain. The doctors say it's from the
electrical shock he received in the arena, but I know it's a
lot more complicated than that. I know that Finnick can't
focus on anything in 13 because he's trying so hard to see
what's happening in the Capitol to Annie, the mad girl from
his district who's the only person on earth he loves.
Despite serious reservations, I had to forgive Finnick
for his role in the conspiracy that landed me here. He, at
least, has some idea of what I'm going through. And it takes
too much energy to stay angry with someone who cries so
much.
I move through the downstairs on hunter's feet,
reluctant to make any sound. I pick up a few
remembrances: a photo of my parents on their wedding
day, a blue hair ribbon for Prim, the family book of
medicinal and edible plants. The book falls open to a page
with yellow flowers and I shut it quickly because it was
Peeta's brush that painted them.
What am I going to do?
Is there any point in doing anything at all? My mother,
my sister, and Gale's family are finally safe. As for the rest
of 12, people are either dead, which is irreversible, or
protected in 13. That leaves the rebels in the districts. Of
course, I hate the Capitol, but I have no confidence that my
being the Mockingjay will benefit those who are trying to
bring it down. How can I help the districts when every time I
make a move, it results in suffering and loss of life? The old
man shot in District 11 for whistling. The crackdown in 12
after I intervened in Gale's whipping. My stylist, Cinna,
being dragged, bloody and unconscious, from the Launch
Room before the Games. Plutarch's sources believe he
was killed during interrogation. Brilliant, enigmatic, lovely
Cinna is dead because of me. I push the thought away
because it's too impossibly painful to dwell on without
losing my fragile hold on the situation entirely.
What am I going to do?
To become the Mockingjay...could any good I do
possibly outweigh the damage? Who can I trust to answer
that question? Certainly not that crew in 13. I swear, now
that my family and Gale's are out of harm's way, I could run
away. Except for one unfinished piece of business. Peeta.
If I knew for sure that he was dead, I could just disappear
into the woods and never look back. But until I do, I'm stuck.
I spin on my heel at the sound of a hiss. In the kitchen
doorway, back arched, ears flattened, stands the ugliest
tomcat in the world. "Buttercup," I say. Thousands of people
are dead, but he has survived and even looks well fed. On
what? He can get in and out of the house through a window
we always left ajar in the pantry. He must have been eating
field mice. I refuse to consider the alternative.
I squat down and extend a hand. "Come here, boy."
Not likely. He's angry at his abandonment. Besides, I'm not
offering food, and my ability to provide scraps has always
been my main redeeming quality to him. For a while, when
we used to meet up at the old house because we both
disliked this new one, we seemed to be bonding a little.
That's clearly over. He blinks those unpleasant yellow eyes.
"Want to see Prim?" I ask. Her name catches his
attention. Besides his own, it's the only word that means
anything to him. He gives a rusty meow and approaches
me. I pick him up, stroking his fur, then go to the closet and
dig out my game bag and unceremoniously stuff him in.
There's no other way I'll be able to carry him on the
hovercraft, and he means the world to my sister. Her goat,
Lady, an animal of actual value, has unfortunately not made
an appearance.
In my headset, I hear Gale's voice telling me we must
go back. But the game bag has reminded me of one more
thing that I want. I sling the strap of the bag over the back of
a chair and dash up the steps to my bedroom. Inside the
closet hangs my father's hunting jacket. Before the Quell, I
brought it here from the old house, thinking its presence
might be of comfort to my mother and sister when I was
dead. Thank goodness, or it'd be ash now.
The soft leather feels soothing and for a moment I'm
calmed by the memories of the hours spent wrapped in it.
Then, inexplicably, my palms begin to sweat. A strange
sensation creeps up the back of my neck. I whip around to
face the room and find it empty. Tidy. Everything in its
place. There was no sound to alarm me. What, then?
My nose twitches. It's the smell. Cloying and artificial. A
dab of white peeks out of a vase of dried flowers on my
dresser. I approach it with cautious steps. There, all but
obscured by its preserved cousins, is a fresh white rose.
Perfect. Down to the last thorn and silken petal.
And I know immediately who's sent it to me.
President Snow.
When I begin to gag at the stench, I back away and
clear out. How long has it been here? A day? An hour? The
rebels did a security sweep of the Victor's Village before I
was cleared to come here, checking for explosives, bugs,
anything unusual. But perhaps the rose didn't seem
noteworthy to them. Only to me.
Downstairs, I snag the game bag off the chair,
bouncing it along the floor until I remember it's occupied.
On the lawn, I frantically signal to the hovercraft while
Buttercup thrashes. I jab him with my elbow, but this only
infuriates him. A hovercraft materializes and a ladder drops
down. I step on and the current freezes me until I'm lifted on
board.
Gale helps me from the ladder. "You all right?"
"Yeah," I say, wiping the sweat off my face with my
sleeve.
He left me a rose! I want to scream, but it's not
information I'm sure I should share with someone like
Plutarch looking on. First of all, because it will make me
sound crazy. Like I either imagined it, which is quite
possible, or I'm overreacting, which will buy me a trip back
to the drug-induced dreamland I'm trying so hard to escape.
No one will fully understand--how it's not just a flower, not
even just President Snow's flower, but a promise of
revenge--because no one else sat in the study with him
when he threatened me before the Victory Tour.
Positioned on my dresser, that white-as-snow rose is
a personal message to me. It speaks of unfinished
business. It whispers, I can find you. I can reach you.
Perhaps I am watching you now.
2
Are there Capitol hoverplanes speeding in to blow us
out of the sky? As we travel over District 12, I watch
anxiously for signs of an attack, but nothing pursues us.
After several minutes, when I hear an exchange between
Plutarch and the pilot confirming that the airspace is clear, I
begin to relax a little.
Gale nods at the howls coming from my game bag.
"Now I know why you had to go back."
"If there was even a chance of his recovery." I dump
the bag onto a seat, where the loathsome creature begins
a low, deep-throated growl. "Oh, shut up," I tell the bag as I
sink into the cushioned window seat across from it.
Gale sits next to me. "Pretty bad down there?"
"Couldn't be much worse," I answer. I look in his eyes
and see my own grief reflected there. Our hands find each
other, holding fast to a part of 12 that Snow has somehow
failed to destroy. We sit in silence for the rest of the trip to
13, which only takes about forty-five minutes. A mere
week's journey on foot. Bonnie and Twill, the District 8
refugees who I encountered in the woods last winter,
weren't so far from their destination after all. They
apparently didn't make it, though. When I asked about them
in 13, no one seemed to know who I was talking about.
Died in the woods, I guess.
From the air, 13 looks about as cheerful as 12. The
rubble isn't smoking, the way the Capitol shows it on
television, but there's next to no life aboveground. In the
seventy-five years since the Dark Days--when 13 was said
to have been obliterated in the war between the Capitol
and the districts--almost all new construction has been
beneath the earth's surface. There was already a
substantial underground facility here, developed over
centuries to be either a clandestine refuge for government
leaders in time of war or a last resort for humanity if life
above became unlivable. Most important for the people of
13, it was the center of the Capitol's nuclear weapons
development program. During the Dark Days, the rebels in
13 wrested control from the government forces, trained
their nuclear missiles on the Capitol, and then struck a
bargain: They would play dead in exchange for being left
alone. The Capitol had another nuclear arsenal out west,
but it couldn't attack 13 without certain retaliation. It was
forced to accept 13's deal. The Capitol demolished the
visible remains of the district and cut off all access from the
outside. Perhaps the Capitol's leaders thought that, without
help, 13 would die off on its own. It almost did a few times,
but it always managed to pull through due to strict sharing
of resources, strenuous discipline, and constant vigilance
against any further attacks from the Capitol.
Now the citizens live almost exclusively underground.
You can go outside for exercise and sunlight but only at very
specific times in your schedule. You can't miss your
schedule. Every morning, you're supposed to stick your
right arm in this contraption in the wall. It tattoos the smooth
inside of your forearm with your schedule for the day in a
sickly purple ink. 7:00--Breakfast. 7:30--Kitchen Duties.
8:30--Education Center, Room 17. And so on. The ink is
indelible until 22:00--Bathing. That's when whatever keeps
it water resistant breaks down and the whole schedule
rinses away. The lights-out at 22:30 signals that everyone
not on the night shift should be in bed.
At first, when I was so ill in the hospital, I could forgo
being imprinted. But once I moved into Compartment 307
with my mother and sister, I was expected to get with the
program. Except for showing up for meals, though, I pretty
much ignore the words on my arm. I just go back to our
compartment or wander around 13 or fall asleep
somewhere hidden. An abandoned air duct. Behind the
water pipes in the laundry. There's a closet in the Education
Center that's great because no one ever seems to need
school supplies. They're so frugal with things here, waste is
practically a criminal activity. Fortunately, the people of 12
have never been wasteful. But once I saw Fulvia Cardew
crumple up a sheet of paper with just a couple of words
written on it and you would've thought she'd murdered
someone from the looks she got. Her face turned tomato
red, making the silver flowers inlaid in her plump cheeks
even more noticeable. The very portrait of excess. One of
my few pleasures in 13 is watching the handful of
pampered Capitol "rebels" squirming as they try to fit in.
I don't know how long I'll be able to get away with my
complete disregard for the clockwork precision of
attendance required by my hosts. Right now, they leave me
alone because I'm classified as mentally disoriented--it
says so right on my plastic medical bracelet--and everyone
has to tolerate my ramblings. But that can't last forever.
Neither can their patience with the Mockingjay issue.
From the landing pad, Gale and I walk down a series
of stairways to Compartment 307. We could take the
elevator, only it reminds me too much of the one that lifted
me into the arena. I'm having a hard time adjusting to being
underground so much. But after the surreal encounter with
the rose, for the first time the descent makes me feel safer.
I hesitate at the door marked 307, anticipating the
questions from my family. "What am I going to tell them
about Twelve?" I ask Gale.
"I doubt they'll ask for details. They saw it burn. They'll
mostly be worried about how you're handling it." Gale
touches my cheek. "Like I am."
I press my face against his hand for a moment. "I'll
survive."
Then I take a deep breath and open the door. My
mother and sister are home for 18:00--Reflection, a half
hour of downtime before dinner. I see the concern on their
faces as they try to gauge my emotional state. Before
anyone can ask anything, I empty my game bag and it
becomes 18:00--Cat Adoration. Prim just sits on the floor
weeping and rocking that awful Buttercup, who interrupts
his purring only for an occasional hiss at me. He gives me a
particularly smug look when she ties the blue ribbon around
his neck.
My mother hugs the wedding photo tightly against her
chest and then places it, along with the book of plants, on
our government-issued chest of drawers. I hang my father's
jacket on the back of a chair. For a moment, the place
almost seems like home. So I guess the trip to 12 wasn't a
complete waste.
We're heading down to the dining hall for 18:30--
Dinner when Gale's communicuff begins to beep. It looks
like an oversized watch, but it receives print messages.
Being granted a communicuff is a special privilege that's
reserved for those important to the cause, a status Gale
achieved by his rescue of the citizens of 12. "They need the
two of us in Command," he says.
Trailing a few steps behind Gale, I try to collect myself
before I'm thrown into what's sure to be another relentless
Mockingjay session. I linger in the doorway of Command,
the high-tech meeting/war council room complete with
computerized talking walls, electronic maps showing the
troop movements in various districts, and a giant
rectangular table with control panels I'm not supposed to
touch. No one notices me, though, because they're all
gathered at a television screen at the far end of the room
that airs the Capitol broadcast around the clock. I'm
thinking I might be able to slip away when Plutarch, whose
ample frame has been blocking the television, catches
sight of me and waves urgently for me to join them. I
reluctantly move forward, trying to imagine how it could be
of interest to me. It's always the same. War footage.
Propaganda. Replaying the bombings of District 12. An
ominous message from President Snow. So it's almost
entertaining to see Caesar Flickerman, the eternal host of
the Hunger Games, with his painted face and sparkly suit,
preparing to give an interview. Until the camera pulls back
and I see that his guest is Peeta.
A sound escapes me. The same combination of gasp
and groan that comes from being submerged in water,
deprived of oxygen to the point of pain. I push people aside
until I am right in front of him, my hand resting on the screen.
I search his eyes for any sign of hurt, any reflection of the
agony of torture. There is nothing. Peeta looks healthy to
the point of robustness. His skin is glowing, flawless, in that
full-body-polish way. His manner's composed, serious. I
can't reconcile this image with the battered, bleeding boy
who haunts my dreams.
Caesar settles himself more comfortably in the chair
across from Peeta and gives him a long look.
"So...Peeta...welcome back."
Peeta smiles slightly. "I bet you thought you'd done
your last interview with me, Caesar."
"I confess, I did," says Caesar. "The night before the
Quarter Quell...well, who ever thought we'd see you again?"
"It wasn't part of my plan, that's for sure," says Peeta
with a frown.
Caesar leans in to him a little. "I think it was clear to all
of us what your plan was. To sacrifice yourself in the arena
so that Katniss Everdeen and your child could survive."
"That was it. Clear and simple." Peeta's fingers trace
the upholstered pattern on the arm of the chair. "But other
people had plans as well."
Yes, other people had plans, I think. Has Peeta
guessed, then, how the rebels used us as pawns? How my
rescue was arranged from the beginning? And finally, how
our mentor, Haymitch Abernathy, betrayed us both for a
cause he pretended to have no interest in?
In the silence that follows, I notice the lines that have
formed between Peeta's eyebrows. He has guessed or he
has been told. But the Capitol has not killed or even
punished him. For right now, that exceeds my wildest
hopes. I drink in his wholeness, the soundness of his body
and mind. It runs through me like the morphling they give
me in the hospital, dulling the pain of the last weeks.
"Why don't you tell us about that last night in the
arena?" suggests Caesar. "Help us sort a few things out."
Peeta nods but takes his time speaking. "That last
night...to tell you about that last night...well, first of all, you
have to imagine how it felt in the arena. It was like being an
insect trapped under a bowl filled with steaming air. And all
around you, jungle...green and alive and ticking. That giant
clock ticking away your life. Every hour promising some
new horror. You have to imagine that in the past two days,
sixteen people have died--some of them defending you. At
the rate things are going, the last eight will be dead by
morning. Save one. The victor. And your plan is that it won't
be you."
My body breaks out in a sweat at the memory. My
hand slides down the screen and hangs limply at my side.
Peeta doesn't need a brush to paint images from the
Games. He works just as well in words.
"Once you're in the arena, the rest of the world
becomes very distant," he continues. "All the people and
things you loved or cared about almost cease to exist. The
pink sky and the monsters in the jungle and the tributes who
want your blood become your final reality, the only one that
ever mattered. As bad as it makes you feel, you're going to
have to do some killing, because in the arena, you only get
one wish. And it's very costly."
"It costs your life," says Caesar.
"Oh, no. It costs a lot more than your life. To murder
innocent people?" says Peeta. "It costs everything you are."
"Everything you are," repeats Caesar quietly.
A hush has fallen over the room, and I can feel it
spreading across Panem. A nation leaning in toward its
screens. Because no one has ever talked about what it's
really like in the arena before.
Peeta goes on. "So you hold on to your wish. And that
last night, yes, my wish was to save Katniss. But even
without knowing about the rebels, it didn't feel right.
Everything was too complicated. I found myself regretting I
hadn't run off with her earlier in the day, as she had
suggested. But there was no getting out of it at that point."
"You were too caught up in Beetee's plan to electrify
the salt lake," says Caesar.
"Too busy playing allies with the others. I should have
never let them separate us!" Peeta bursts out. "That's when
I lost her."
"When you stayed at the lightning tree, and she and
Johanna Mason took the coil of wire down to the water,"
Caesar clarifies.
"I didn't want to!" Peeta flushes in agitation. "But I
couldn't argue with Beetee without indicating we were
about to break away from the alliance. When that wire was
cut, everything just went insane. I can only remember bits
and pieces. Trying to find her. Watching Brutus kill Chaff.
Killing Brutus myself. I know she was calling my name. Then
the lightning bolt hit the tree, and the force field around the
arena...blew out."
"Katniss blew it out, Peeta," says Caesar. "You've
seen the footage."
"She didn't know what she was doing. None of us
could follow Beetee's plan. You can see her trying to figure
out what to do with that wire," Peeta snaps back.
"All right. It just looks suspicious," says Caesar. "As if
she was part of the rebels' plan all along."
Peeta's on his feet, leaning in to Caesar's face, hands
locked on the arms of his interviewer's chair. "Really? And
was it part of her plan for Johanna to nearly kill her? For that
electric shock to paralyze her? To trigger the bombing?"
He's yelling now. "She didn't know, Caesar! Neither of us
knew anything except that we were trying to keep each
other alive!"
Caesar places his hand on Peeta's chest in a gesture
that's both self-protective and conciliatory. "Okay, Peeta, I
believe you."
"Okay." Peeta withdraws from Caesar, pulling back his
hands, running them through his hair, mussing his carefully
styled blond curls. He slumps back in his chair, distraught.
Caesar waits a moment, studying Peeta. "What about
your mentor, Haymitch Abernathy?"
Peeta's face hardens. "I don't know what Haymitch
knew."
"Could he have been part of the conspiracy?" asks
Caesar.
"He never mentioned it," says Peeta.
Caesar presses on. "What does your heart tell you?"
"That I shouldn't have trusted him," says Peeta. "That's
all."
I haven't seen Haymitch since I attacked him on the
hovercraft, leaving long claw marks down his face. I know
it's been bad for him here. District 13 strictly forbids any
production or consumption of intoxicating beverages, and
even the rubbing alcohol in the hospital is kept under lock
and key. Finally, Haymitch is being forced into sobriety, with
no secret stashes or home-brewed concoctions to ease his
transition. They've got him in seclusion until he's dried out,
as he's not deemed fit for public display. It must be
excruciating, but I lost all my sympathy for Haymitch when I
realized how he had deceived us. I hope he's watching the
Capitol broadcast now, so he can see that Peeta has cast
him off as well.
Caesar pats Peeta's shoulder. "We can stop now if
you want."
"Was there more to discuss?" says Peeta wryly.
"I was going to ask your thoughts on the war, but if
you're too upset..." begins Caesar.
"Oh, I'm not too upset to answer that." Peeta takes a
deep breath and then looks straight into the camera. "I want
everyone watching--whether you're on the Capitol or the
rebel side--to stop for just a moment and think about what
this war could mean. For human beings. We almost went
extinct fighting one another before. Now our numbers are
even fewer. Our conditions more tenuous. Is this really what
we want to do? Kill ourselves off completely? In the hopes
that--what? Some decent species will inherit the smoking
remains of the earth?"
"I don't really...I'm not sure I'm following..." says
Caesar.
"We can't fight one another, Caesar," Peeta explains.
"There won't be enough of us left to keep going. If
everybody doesn't lay down their weapons--and I mean, as
in very soon--it's all over, anyway."
"So...you're calling for a cease-fire?" Caesar asks.
"Yes. I'm calling for a cease-fire," says Peeta tiredly.
"Now why don't we ask the guards to take me back to my
quarters so I can build another hundred card houses?"
Caesar turns to the camera. "All right. I think that wraps
it up. So back to our regularly scheduled programming."
Music plays them out, and then there's a woman
reading a list of expected shortages in the Capitol--fresh
fruit, solar batteries, soap. I watch her with uncharacteristic
absorption, because I know everyone will be waiting for my
reaction to the interview. But there's no way I can process it
all so quickly--the joy of seeing Peeta alive and unharmed,
his defense of my innocence in collaborating with the
rebels, and his undeniable complicity with the Capitol now
that he's called for a cease-fire. Oh, he made it sound as if
he were condemning both sides in the war. But at this point,
with only minor victories for the rebels, a cease-fire could
only result in a return to our previous status. Or worse.
Behind me, I can hear the accusations against Peeta
building. The words traitor, liar, and enemy bounce off the
walls. Since I can neither join in the rebels' outrage nor
counter it, I decide the best thing to do is clear out. As I
reach the door, Coin's voice rises above the others. "You
have not been dismissed, Soldier Everdeen."
One of Coin's men lays a hand on my arm. It's not an
aggressive move, really, but after the arena, I react
defensively to any unfamiliar touch. I jerk my arm free and
take off running down the halls. Behind me, there's the
sound of a scuffle, but I don't stop. My mind does a quick
inventory of my odd little hiding places, and I wind up in the
supply closet, curled up against a crate of chalk.
"You're alive," I whisper, pressing my palms against
my cheeks, feeling the smile that's so wide it must look like
a grimace. Peeta's alive. And a traitor. But at the moment, I
don't care. Not what he says, or who he says it for, only that
he is still capable of speech.
After a while, the door opens and someone slips in.
Gale slides down beside me, his nose trickling blood.
"What happened?" I ask.
"I got in Boggs's way," he answers with a shrug. I use
my sleeve to wipe his nose. "Watch it!"
I try to be gentler. Patting, not wiping. "Which one is
he?"
"Oh, you know. Coin's right-hand lackey. The one who
tried to stop you." He pushes my hand away. "Quit! You'll
bleed me to death."
The trickle has turned to a steady stream. I give up on
the first-aid attempts. "You fought with Boggs?"
"No, just blocked the doorway when he tried to follow
you. His elbow caught me in the nose," says Gale.
"They'll probably punish you," I say.
"Already have." He holds up his wrist. I stare at it
uncomprehendingly. "Coin took back my communicuff."
I bite my lip, trying to remain serious. But it seems so
ridiculous. "I'm sorry, Soldier Gale Hawthorne."
"Don't be, Soldier Katniss Everdeen." He grins. "I felt
like a jerk walking around with it anyway." We both start
laughing. "I think it was quite a demotion."
This is one of the few good things about 13. Getting
Gale back. With the pressure of the Capitol's arranged
marriage between Peeta and me gone, we've managed to
regain our friendship. He doesn't push it any further--try to
kiss me or talk about love. Either I've been too sick, or he's
willing to give me space, or he knows it's just too cruel with
Peeta in the hands of the Capitol. Whatever the case, I've
got someone to tell my secrets to again.
"Who are these people?" I say.
"They're us. If we'd had nukes instead of a few lumps
of coal," he answers.
"I like to think Twelve wouldn't have abandoned the rest
of the rebels back in the Dark Days," I say.
"We might have. If it was that, surrender, or start a
nuclear war," says Gale. "In a way, it's remarkable they
survived at all."
Maybe it's because I still have the ashes of my own
district on my shoes, but for the first time, I give the people
of 13 something I have withheld from them: credit. For
staying alive against all odds. Their early years must have
been terrible, huddled in the chambers beneath the ground
after their city was bombed to dust. Population decimated,
no possible ally to turn to for aid. Over the past seventy-five
years, they've learned to be self-sufficient, turned their
citizens into an army, and built a new society with no help
from anyone. They would be even more powerful if that pox
epidemic hadn't flattened their birthrate and made them so
desperate for a new gene pool and breeders. Maybe they
are militaristic, overly programmed, and somewhat lacking
in a sense of humor. They're here. And willing to take on the
Capitol.
"Still, it took them long enough to show up," I say.
"It wasn't simple. They had to build up a rebel base in
the Capitol, get some sort of underground organized in the
districts," he says. "Then they needed someone to set the
whole thing in motion. They needed you."
"They needed Peeta, too, but they seem to have
forgotten that," I say.
Gale's expression darkens. "Peeta might have done a
lot of damage tonight. Most of the rebels will dismiss what
he said immediately, of course. But there are districts
where the resistance is shakier. The cease-fire's clearly
President Snow's idea. But it seems so reasonable coming
out of Peeta's mouth."
I'm afraid of Gale's answer, but I ask anyway. "Why do
you think he said it?"
"He might have been tortured. Or persuaded. My
guess is he made some kind of deal to protect you. He'd
put forth the idea of the cease-fire if Snow let him present
you as a confused pregnant girl who had no idea what was
going on when she was taken prisoner by the rebels. This
way, if the districts lose, there's still a chance of leniency for
you. If you play it right." I must still look perplexed because
Gale delivers the next line very slowly. "Katniss...he's still
trying to keep you alive."
To keep me alive? And then I understand. The Games
are still on. We have left the arena, but since Peeta and I
weren't killed, his last wish to preserve my life still stands.
His idea is to have me lie low, remain safe and imprisoned,
while the war plays out. Then neither side will really have
cause to kill me. And Peeta? If the rebels win, it will be
disastrous for him. If the Capitol wins, who knows? Maybe
we'll both be allowed to live--if I play it right--to watch the
Games go on....
Images flash through my mind: the spear piercing
Rue's body in the arena, Gale hanging senseless from the
whipping post, the corpse-littered wasteland of my home.
And for what? For what? As my blood turns hot, I remember
other things. My first glimpse of an uprising in District 8.
The victors locked hand in hand the night before the
Quarter Quell. And how it was no accident, my shooting that
arrow into the force field in the arena. How badly I wanted it
to lodge deep in the heart of my enemy.
I spring up, upsetting a box of a hundred pencils,
sending them scattering around the floor.
"What is it?" Gale asks.
"There can't be a cease-fire." I lean down, fumbling as I
shove the sticks of dark gray graphite back into the box.
"We can't go back."
"I know." Gale sweeps up a handful of pencils and taps
them on the floor into perfect alignment.
"Whatever reason Peeta had for saying those things,
he's wrong." The stupid sticks won't go in the box and I
snap several in my frustration.
"I know. Give it here. You're breaking them to bits." He
pulls the box from my hands and refills it with swift, concise
motions.
"He doesn't know what they did to Twelve. If he
could've seen what was on the ground--" I start.
"Katniss, I'm not arguing. If I could hit a button and kill
every living soul working for the Capitol, I would do it.
Without hesitation." He slides the last pencil into the box
and flips the lid closed. "The question is, what are you
going to do?"
It turns out the question that's been eating away at me
has only ever had one possible answer. But it took Peeta's
ploy for me to recognize it.
What am I going to do?
I take a deep breath. My arms rise slightly--as if
recalling the black-and-white wings Cinna gave me--then
come to rest at my sides.
"I'm going to be the Mockingjay."
3
Buttercup's eyes reflect the faint glow of the safety light
over the door as he lies in the crook of Prim's arm, back on
the job, protecting her from the night. She's snuggled close
to my mother. Asleep, they look just as they did the morning
of the reaping that landed me in my first Games. I have a
bed to myself because I'm recuperating and because no
one can sleep with me anyway, what with the nightmares
and the thrashing around.
After tossing and turning for hours, I finally accept that it
will be a wakeful night. Under Buttercup's watchful eye, I
tiptoe across the cold tiled floor to the dresser.
The middle drawer contains my government-issued
clothes. Everyone wears the same gray pants and shirt, the
shirt tucked in at the waist. Underneath the clothes, I keep
the few items I had on me when I was lifted from the arena.
My mockingjay pin. Peeta's token, the gold locket with
photos of my mother and Prim and Gale inside. A silver
parachute that holds a spile for tapping trees, and the pearl
Peeta gave me a few hours before I blew out the force field.
District 13 confiscated my tube of skin ointment for use in
the hospital, and my bow and arrows because only guards
have clearance to carry weapons. They're in safekeeping in
the armory.
I feel around for the parachute and slide my fingers
inside until they close around the pearl. I sit back on my bed
cross-legged and find myself rubbing the smooth iridescent
surface of the pearl back and forth against my lips. For
some reason, it's soothing. A cool kiss from the giver
himself.
"Katniss?" Prim whispers. She's awake, peering at
me through the darkness. "What's wrong?"
"Nothing. Just a bad dream. Go back to sleep." It's
automatic. Shutting Prim and my mother out of things to
shield them.
Careful not to rouse my mother, Prim eases herself
from the bed, scoops up Buttercup, and sits beside me.
She touches the hand that has curled around the pearl.
"You're cold." Taking a spare blanket from the foot of the
bed, she wraps it around all three of us, enveloping me in
her warmth and Buttercup's furry heat as well. "You could
tell me, you know. I'm good at keeping secrets. Even from
Mother."
She's really gone, then. The little girl with the back of
her shirt sticking out like a duck tail, the one who needed
help reaching the dishes, and who begged to see the
frosted cakes in the bakery window. Time and tragedy have
forced her to grow too quickly, at least for my taste, into a
young woman who stitches bleeding wounds and knows
our mother can hear only so much.
"Tomorrow morning, I'm going to agree to be the
Mockingjay," I tell her.
"Because you want to or because you feel forced into
it?" she asks.
I laugh a little. "Both, I guess. No, I want to. I have to, if it
will help the rebels defeat Snow." I squeeze the pearl more
tightly in my fist. "It's just...Peeta. I'm afraid if we do win, the
rebels will execute him as a traitor."
Prim thinks this over. "Katniss, I don't think you
understand how important you are to the cause. Important
people usually get what they want. If you want to keep
Peeta safe from the rebels, you can."
I guess I'm important. They went to a lot of trouble to
rescue me. They took me to 12. "You mean...I could
demand that they give Peeta immunity? And they'd have to
agree to it?"
"I think you could demand almost anything and they'd
have to agree to it." Prim wrinkles her brow. "Only how do
you know they'll keep their word?"
I remember all of the lies Haymitch told Peeta and me
to get us to do what he wanted. What's to keep the rebels
from reneging on the deal? A verbal promise behind closed
doors, even a statement written on paper--these could
easily evaporate after the war. Their existence or validity
denied. Any witnesses in Command will be worthless. In
fact, they'd probably be the ones writing out Peeta's death
warrant. I'll need a much larger pool of witnesses. I'll need
everyone I can get.
"It will have to be public," I say. Buttercup gives a flick
of his tail that I take as agreement. "I'll make Coin announce
it in front of the entire population of Thirteen."
Prim smiles. "Oh, that's good. It's not a guarantee, but
it will be much harder for them to back out of their promise."
I feel the kind of relief that follows an actual solution. "I
should wake you up more often, little duck."
"I wish you would," says Prim. She gives me a kiss.
"Try and sleep now, all right?" And I do.
In the morning, I see that 7:00--Breakfast is directly
followed by 7:30--Command, which is fine since I may as
well start the ball rolling. At the dining hall, I flash my
schedule, which includes some kind of ID number, in front
of a sensor. As I slide my tray along the metal shelf before
the vats of food, I see breakfast is its usual dependable
self--a bowl of hot grain, a cup of milk, and a small scoop of
fruit or vegetables. Today, mashed turnips. All of it comes
from 13's underground farms. I sit at the table assigned to
the Everdeens and the Hawthornes and some other
refugees, and shovel my food down, wishing for seconds,
but there are never seconds here. They have nutrition down
to a science. You leave with enough calories to take you to
the next meal, no more, no less. Serving size is based on
your age, height, body type, health, and amount of physical
labor required by your schedule. The people from 12 are
already getting slightly larger portions than the natives of 13
in an effort to bring us up to weight. I guess bony soldiers
tire too quickly. It's working, though. In just a month, we're
starting to look healthier, particularly the kids.
Gale sets his tray beside me and I try not to stare at his
turnips too pathetically, because I really want more, and
he's already too quick to slip me his food. Even though I
turn my attention to neatly folding my napkin, a spoonful of
turnips slops into my bowl.
"You've got to stop that," I say. But since I'm already
scooping up the stuff, it's not too convincing. "Really. It's
probably illegal or something." They have very strict rules
about food. For instance, if you don't finish something and
want to save it for later, you can't take it from the dining hall.
Apparently, in the early days, there was some incident of
food hoarding. For a couple of people like Gale and me,
who've been in charge of our families' food supply for
years, it doesn't sit well. We know how to be hungry, but not
how to be told how to handle what provisions we have. In
some ways, District 13 is even more controlling than the
Capitol.
"What can they do? They've already got my
communicuff," says Gale.
As I scrape my bowl clean, I have an inspiration. "Hey,
maybe I should make that a condition of being the
Mockingjay."
"That I can feed you turnips?" he says.
"No, that we can hunt." That gets his attention. "We'd
have to give everything to the kitchen. But still, we could..." I
don't have to finish because he knows. We could be
aboveground. Out in the woods. We could be ourselves
again.
"Do it," he says. "Now's the time. You could ask for the
moon and they'd have to find some way to get it."
He doesn't know that I'm already asking for the moon
by demanding they spare Peeta's life. Before I can decide
whether or not to tell him, a bell signals the end of our
eating shift. The thought of facing Coin alone makes me
nervous. "What are you scheduled for?"
Gale checks his arm. "Nuclear History class. Where,
by the way, your absence has been noted."
"I have to go to Command. Come with me?" I ask.
"All right. But they might throw me out after yesterday."
As we go to drop off our trays, he says, "You know, you
better put Buttercup on your list of demands, too. I don't
think the concept of useless pets is well known here."
"Oh, they'll find him a job. Tattoo it on his paw every
morning," I say. But I make a mental note to include him for
Prim's sake.
By the time we get to Command, Coin, Plutarch, and
all their people have already assembled. The sight of Gale
raises some eyebrows, but no one throws him out. My
mental notes have become too jumbled, so I ask for a
piece of paper and a pencil right off. My apparent interest
in the proceedings--the first I've shown since I've been here-
-takes them by surprise. Several looks are exchanged.
Probably they had some extra-special lecture planned for
me. But instead, Coin personally hands me the supplies,
and everyone waits in silence while I sit at the table and
scrawl out my list. Buttercup. Hunting. Peeta's immunity.
Announced in public.
This is it. Probably my only chance to bargain. Think.
What else do you want? I feel him, standing at my shoulder.
Gale, I add to the list. I don't think I can do this without him.
The headache's coming on and my thoughts begin to
tangle. I shut my eyes and start to recite silently.
My name is Katniss Everdeen. I am seventeen years
old. My home is District 12. I was in the Hunger Games. I
escaped. The Capitol hates me. Peeta was taken
prisoner. He is alive. He is a traitor but alive. I have to
keep him alive....
The list. It still seems too small. I should try to think
bigger, beyond our current situation where I am of the
utmost importance, to the future where I may be worth
nothing. Shouldn't I be asking for more? For my family? For
the remainder of my people? My skin itches with the ashes
of the dead. I feel the sickening impact of the skull against
my shoe. The scent of blood and roses stings my nose.
The pencil moves across the page on its own. I open
my eyes and see the wobbly letters. I KILL SNOW. If he's
captured, I want the privilege.
Plutarch gives a discreet cough. "About done there?" I
glance up and notice the clock. I've been sitting here for
twenty minutes. Finnick isn't the only one with attention
problems.
"Yeah," I say. My voice sounds hoarse, so I clear my
throat. "Yeah, so this is the deal. I'll be your Mockingjay."
I wait so they can make their sounds of relief,
congratulate, slap one another on the back. Coin stays as
impassive as ever, watching me, unimpressed.
"But I have some conditions." I smooth out the list and
begin. "My family gets to keep our cat." My tiniest request
sets off an argument. The Capitol rebels see this as a
nonissue--of course, I can keep my pet--while those from
13 spell out what extreme difficulties this presents. Finally
it's worked out that we'll be moved to the top level, which
has the luxury of an eight-inch window aboveground.
Buttercup may come and go to do his business. He will be
expected to feed himself. If he misses curfew, he will be
locked out. If he causes any security problems, he'll be shot
immediately.
That sounds okay. Not so different from how he's been
living since we left. Except for the shooting part. If he looks
too thin, I can slip him a few entrails, provided my next
request is allowed.
"I want to hunt. With Gale. Out in the woods," I say. This
gives everyone pause.
"We won't go far. We'll use our own bows. You can
have the meat for the kitchen," adds Gale.
I hurry on before they can say no. "It's just...I can't
breathe shut up here like a...I would get better, faster, if...I
could hunt."
Plutarch begins to explain the drawbacks here--the
dangers, the extra security, the risk of injury--but Coin cuts
him off. "No. Let them. Give them two hours a day,
deducted from their training time. A quarter-mile radius.
With communication units and tracker anklets. What's
next?"
I skim my list. "Gale. I'll need him with me to do this."
"With you how? Off camera? By your side at all times?
Do you want him presented as your new lover?" Coin asks.
She hasn't said this with any particular malice--quite
the contrary, her words are very matter-of-fact. But my
mouth still drops open in shock. "What?"
"I think we should continue the current romance. A
quick defection from Peeta could cause the audience to
lose sympathy for her," says Plutarch. "Especially since
they think she's pregnant with his child."
"Agreed. So, on-screen, Gale can simply be portrayed
as a fellow rebel. Is that all right?" says Coin. I just stare at
her. She repeats herself impatiently. "For Gale. Will that be
sufficient?"
"We can always work him in as your cousin," says
Fulvia.
"We're not cousins," Gale and I say together.
"Right, but we should probably keep that up for
appearances' sake on camera," says Plutarch. "Off
camera, he's all yours. Anything else?"
I'm rattled by the turn in the conversation. The
implications that I could so readily dispose of Peeta, that
I'm in love with Gale, that the whole thing has been an act.
My cheeks begin to burn. The very notion that I'm devoting
any thought to who I want presented as my lover, given our
current circumstances, is demeaning. I let my anger propel
me into my greatest demand. "When the war is over, if
we've won, Peeta will be pardoned."
Dead silence. I feel Gale's body tense. I guess I should
have told him before, but I wasn't sure how he'd respond.
Not when it involved Peeta.
"No form of punishment will be inflicted," I continue. A
new thought occurs to me. "The same goes for the other
captured tributes, Johanna and Enobaria." Frankly, I don't
care about Enobaria, the vicious District 2 tribute. In fact, I
dislike her, but it seems wrong to leave her out.
"No," says Coin flatly.
"Yes," I shoot back. "It's not their fault you abandoned
them in the arena. Who knows what the Capitol's doing to
them?"
"They'll be tried with other war criminals and treated as
the tribunal sees fit," she says.
"They'll be granted immunity!" I feel myself rising from
my chair, my voice full and resonant. "You will personally
pledge this in front of the entire population of District
Thirteen and the remainder of Twelve. Soon. Today. It will
be recorded for future generations. You will hold yourself
and your government responsible for their safety, or you'll
find yourself another Mockingjay!"
My words hang in the air for a long moment.
"That's her!" I hear Fulvia hiss to Plutarch. "Right there.
With the costume, gunfire in the background, just a hint of
smoke."
"Yes, that's what we want," says Plutarch under his
breath.
I want to glare at them, but I feel it would be a mistake
to turn my attention from Coin. I can see her tallying the cost
of my ultimatum, weighing it against my possible worth.
"What do you say, President?" asks Plutarch. "You
could issue an official pardon, given the circumstances.
The boy...he's not even of age."
"All right," Coin says finally. "But you'd better perform."
"I'll perform when you've made the announcement," I
say.
"Call a national security assembly during Reflection
today," she orders. "I'll make the announcement then. Is
there anything left on your list, Katniss?"
My paper's crumpled into a ball in my right fist. I flatten
the sheet against the table and read the rickety letters.
"Just one more thing. I kill Snow."
For the first time ever, I see the hint of a smile on the
president's lips. "When the time comes, I'll flip you for it."
Maybe she's right. I certainly don't have the sole claim
against Snow's life. And I think I can count on her getting the
job done. "Fair enough."
Coin's eyes have flickered to her arm, the clock. She,
too, has a schedule to adhere to. "I'll leave her in your
hands, then, Plutarch." She exits the room, followed by her
team, leaving only Plutarch, Fulvia, Gale, and myself.
"Excellent. Excellent." Plutarch sinks down, elbows on
the table, rubbing his eyes. "You know what I miss? More
than anything? Coffee. I ask you, would it be so unthinkable
to have something to wash down the gruel and turnips?"
"We didn't think it would be quite so rigid here," Fulvia
explains to us as she massages Plutarch's shoulders. "Not
in the higher ranks."
"Or at least there'd be the option of a little side action,"
says Plutarch. "I mean, even Twelve had a black market,
right?"
"Yeah, the Hob," says Gale. "It's where we traded."
"There, you see? And look how moral you two are!
Virtually incorruptible." Plutarch sighs. "Oh, well, wars don't
last forever. So, glad to have you on the team." He reaches
a hand out to the side, where Fulvia is already extending a
large sketchbook bound in black leather. "You know in
general what we're asking of you, Katniss. I'm aware you
have mixed feelings about participating. I hope this will
help."Plutarch slides the sketchbook across to me. For a
moment, I look at it suspiciously. Then curiosity gets the
better of me. I open the cover to find a picture of myself,
standing straight and strong, in a black uniform. Only one
person could have designed the outfit, at first glance utterly
utilitarian, at second a work of art. The swoop of the helmet,
the curve to the breastplate, the slight fullness of the
sleeves that allows the white folds under the arms to show.
In his hands, I am again a mockingjay.
"Cinna," I whisper.
"Yes. He made me promise not to show you this book
until you'd decided to be the Mockingjay on your own.
Believe me, I was very tempted," says Plutarch. "Go on.
Flip through."
I turn the pages slowly, seeing each detail of the
uniform. The carefully tailored layers of body armor, the
hidden weapons in the boots and belt, the special
reinforcements over my heart. On the final page, under a
sketch of my mockingjay pin, Cinna's written, I'm still
betting on you.
"When did he..." My voice fails me.
"Let's see. Well, after the Quarter Quell announcement.
A few weeks before the Games maybe? There are not only
the sketches. We have your uniforms. Oh, and Beetee's got
something really special waiting for you down in the armory.
I won't spoil it by hinting," says Plutarch.
"You're going to be the best-dressed rebel in history,"
says Gale with a smile. Suddenly, I realize he's been
holding out on me. Like Cinna, he's wanted me to make
this decision all along.
"Our plan is to launch an Airtime Assault," says
Plutarch. "To make a series of what we call propos--which
is short for 'propaganda spots'--featuring you, and
broadcast them to the entire population of Panem."
"How? The Capitol has sole control of the broadcasts,"
says Gale.
"But we have Beetee. About ten years ago, he
essentially redesigned the underground network that
transmits all the programming. He thinks there's a
reasonable chance it can be done. Of course, we'll need
something to air. So, Katniss, the studio awaits your
pleasure." Plutarch turns to his assistant. "Fulvia?"
"Plutarch and I have been talking about how on earth
we can pull this off. We think that it might be best to build
you, our rebel leader, from the outside...in. That is to say,
let's find the most stunning Mockingjay look possible, and
then work your personality up to deserving it!" she says
brightly.
"You already have her uniform," says Gale.
"Yes, but is she scarred and bloody? Is she glowing
with the fire of rebellion? Just how grimy can we make her
without disgusting people? At any rate, she has to be
something. I mean, obviously this"--Fulvia moves in on me
quickly, framing my face with her hands--"won't cut it." I jerk
my head back reflexively but she's already busy gathering
her things. "So, with that in mind, we have another little
surprise for you. Come, come."
Fulvia gives us a wave, and Gale and I follow her and
Plutarch out into the hall.
"So well intended, and yet so insulting," Gale whispers
in my ear.
"Welcome to the Capitol," I mouth back. But Fulvia's
words have no effect on me. I wrap my arms tightly around
the sketchbook and allow myself to feel hopeful. This must
be the right decision. If Cinna wanted it.
We board an elevator, and Plutarch checks his notes.
"Let's see. It's Compartment Three-Nine-Oh-Eight." He
presses a button marked 39, but nothing happens.
"You must have to key it," says Fulvia.
Plutarch pulls a key attached to a thin chain from under
his shirt and inserts it into a slot I hadn't noticed before. The
doors slide shut. "Ah, there we are."
The elevator descends ten, twenty, thirty-plus levels,
farther down than I even knew District 13 went. It opens on
a wide white corridor lined with red doors, which look
almost decorative compared to the gray ones on the upper
floors. Each is plainly marked with a number. 3901, 3902,
3903...
As we step out, I glance behind me to watch the
elevator close and see a metallic grate slide into place over
the regular doors. When I turn, a guard has materialized
from one of the rooms at the far end of the corridor. A door
swings silently shut behind him as he strides toward us.
Plutarch moves to meet him, raising a hand in
greeting, and the rest of us follow behind him. Something
feels very wrong down here. It's more than the reinforced
elevator, or the claustrophobia of being so far underground,
or the caustic smell of antiseptic. One look at Gale's face
and I can tell he senses it as well.
"Good morning, we were just looking for--" Plutarch
begins.
"You have the wrong floor," says the guard abruptly.
"Really?" Plutarch double-checks his notes. "I've got
Three-Nine-Oh-Eight written right here. I wonder if you could
just give a call up to--"
"I'm afraid I have to ask you to leave now. Assignment
discrepancies can be addressed at the Head Office," says
the guard.
It's right ahead of us. Compartment 3908. Just a few
steps away. The door--in fact, all the doors--seem
incomplete. No knobs. They must swing free on hinges like
the one the guard appeared through.
"Where is that again?" asks Fulvia.
"You'll find the Head Office on Level Seven," says the
guard, extending his arms to corral us back to the elevator.
From behind door 3908 comes a sound. Just a tiny
whimper. Like something a cowed dog might make to
avoid being struck, only all too human and familiar. My eyes
meet Gale's for just a moment, but it's long enough for two
people who operate the way we do. I let Cinna's
sketchbook fall at the guard's feet with a loud bang. A
second after he leans down to retrieve it, Gale leans down,
too, intentionally bumping heads. "Oh, I'm sorry," he says
with a light laugh, catching the guard's arms as if to steady
himself, turning him slightly away from me.
That's my chance. I dart around the distracted guard,
push open the door marked 3908, and find them. Halfnaked,
bruised, and shackled to the wall.
My prep team.
4
The stink of unwashed bodies, stale urine, and
infection breaks through the cloud of antiseptic. The three
figures are only just recognizable by their most striking
fashion choices: Venia's gold facial tattoos. Flavius's
orange corkscrew curls. Octavia's light evergreen skin,
which now hangs too loosely, as if her body were a slowly
deflating balloon.
On seeing me, Flavius and Octavia shrink back
against the tiled walls like they're anticipating an attack,
even though I have never hurt them. Unkind thoughts were
my worst offense against them, and those I kept to myself,
so why do they recoil?
The guard's ordering me out, but by the shuffling that
follows, I know Gale has somehow detained him. For
answers, I cross to Venia, who was always the strongest. I
crouch down and take her icy hands, which clutch mine like
vises.
"What happened, Venia?" I ask. "What are you doing
here?"
"They took us. From the Capitol," she says hoarsely.
Plutarch enters behind me. "What on earth is going
on?"
"Who took you?" I press her.
"People," she says vaguely. "The night you broke out."
"We thought it might be comforting for you to have your
regular team," Plutarch says behind me. "Cinna requested
it."
"Cinna requested this?" I snarl at him. Because if
there's one thing I know, it's that Cinna would never have
approved the abuse of these three, who he managed with
gentleness and patience. "Why are they being treated like
criminals?"
"I honestly don't know." There's something in his voice
that makes me believe him, and the pallor on Fulvia's face
confirms it. Plutarch turns to the guard, who's just appeared
in the doorway with Gale right behind him. "I was only told
they were being confined. Why are they being punished?"
"For stealing food. We had to restrain them after an
altercation over some bread," says the guard.
Venia's brows come together as if she's still trying to
make sense of it. "No one would tell us anything. We were
so hungry. It was just one slice she took."
Octavia begins to sob, muffling the sound in her
ragged tunic. I think of how, the first time I survived the
arena, Octavia sneaked me a roll under the table because
she couldn't bear my hunger. I crawl across to her shaking
form. "Octavia?" I touch her and she flinches. "Octavia? It's
going to be all right. I'll get you out of here, okay?"
"This seems extreme," says Plutarch.
"It's because they took a slice of bread?" asks Gale.
"There were repeated infractions leading up to that.
They were warned. Still they took more bread." The guard
pauses a moment, as if puzzled by our density. "You can't
take bread."
I can't get Octavia to uncover her face, but she lifts it
slightly. The shackles on her wrists shift down a few inches,
revealing raw sores beneath them. "I'm bringing you to my
mother." I address the guard. "Unchain them."
The guard shakes his head. "It's not authorized."
"Unchain them! Now!" I yell.
This breaks his composure. Average citizens don't
address him this way. "I have no release orders. And you
have no authority to--"
"Do it on my authority," says Plutarch. "We came to
collect these three anyway. They're needed for Special
Defense. I'll take full responsibility."
The guard leaves to make a call. He returns with a set
of keys. The preps have been forced into cramped body
positions for so long that even once the shackles are
removed, they have trouble walking. Gale, Plutarch, and I
have to help them. Flavius's foot catches on a metal grate
over a circular opening in the floor, and my stomach
contracts when I think of why a room would need a drain.
The stains of human misery that must have been hosed off
these white tiles...
In the hospital, I find my mother, the only one I trust to
care for them. It takes her a minute to place the three, given
their current condition, but already she wears a look of
consternation. And I know it's not a result of seeing abused
bodies, because they were her daily fare in District 12, but
the realization that this sort of thing goes on in 13 as well.
My mother was welcomed into the hospital, but she's
viewed as more of a nurse than a doctor, despite her
lifetime of healing. Still, no one interferes when she guides
the trio into an examination room to assess their injuries. I
plant myself on a bench in the hall outside the hospital
entrance, waiting to hear her verdict. She will be able to
read in their bodies the pain inflicted upon them.
Gale sits next to me and puts an arm around my
shoulder. "She'll fix them up." I give a nod, wondering if he's
thinking about his own brutal flogging back in 12.
Plutarch and Fulvia take the bench across from us but
don't offer any comments on the state of my prep team. If
they had no knowledge of the mistreatment, then what do
they make of this move on President Coin's part? I decide
to help them out.
"I guess we've all been put on notice," I say.
"What? No. What do you mean?" asks Fulvia.
"Punishing my prep team's a warning," I tell her. "Not
just to me. But to you, too. About who's really in control and
what happens if she's not obeyed. If you had any delusions
about having power, I'd let them go now. Apparently, a
Capitol pedigree is no protection here. Maybe it's even a
liability."
"There is no comparison between Plutarch, who
masterminded the rebel breakout, and those three
beauticians," says Fulvia icily.
I shrug. "If you say so, Fulvia. But what would happen if
you got on Coin's bad side? My prep team was kidnapped.
They can at least hope to one day return to the Capitol.
Gale and I can live in the woods. But you? Where would you
two run?"
"Perhaps we're a little more necessary to the war effort
than you give us credit for," says Plutarch, unconcerned.
"Of course you are. The tributes were necessary to the
Games, too. Until they weren't," I say. "And then we were
very disposable--right, Plutarch?"
That ends the conversation. We wait in silence until my
mother finds us. "They'll be all right," she reports. "No
permanent physical injuries."
"Good. Splendid," says Plutarch. "How soon can they
be put to work?"
"Probably tomorrow," she answers. "You'll have to
expect some emotional instability, after what they've been
through. They were particularly ill prepared, coming from
their life in the Capitol."
"Weren't we all?" says Plutarch.
Either because the prep team's incapacitated or I'm
too on edge, Plutarch releases me from Mockingjay duties
for the rest of the day. Gale and I head down to lunch, where
we're served bean and onion stew, a thick slice of bread,
and a cup of water. After Venia's story, the bread sticks in
my throat, so I slide the rest of it onto Gale's tray. Neither of
us speaks much during lunch, but when our bowls are
clean, Gale pulls up his sleeve, revealing his schedule. "I've
got training next."
I tug up my sleeve and hold my arm next to his. "Me,
too." I remember that training equals hunting now.
My eagerness to escape into the woods, if only for two
hours, overrides my current concerns. An immersion into
greenery and sunlight will surely help me sort out my
thoughts. Once off the main corridors, Gale and I race like
schoolchildren for the armory, and by the time we arrive, I'm
breathless and dizzy. A reminder that I'm not fully
recovered. The guards provide our old weapons, as well as
knives and a burlap sack that's meant for a game bag. I
tolerate having the tracker clamped to my ankle, try to look
as if I'm listening when they explain how to use the handheld
communicator. The only thing that sticks in my head is that
it has a clock, and we must be back inside 13 by the
designated hour or our hunting privileges will be revoked.
This is one rule I think I will make an effort to abide.
We go outside into the large, fenced-in training area
beside the woods. Guards open the well-oiled gates
without comment. We would be hard-pressed to get past
this fence on our own--thirty feet high and always buzzing
with electricity, topped with razor-sharp curls of steel. We
move through the woods until the view of the fence has
been obscured. In a small clearing, we pause and drop
back our heads to bask in the sunlight. I turn in a circle, my
arms extended at my sides, revolving slowly so as not to
set the world spinning.
The lack of rain I saw in 12 has damaged the plants
here as well, leaving some with brittle leaves, building a
crunchy carpet under our feet. We take off our shoes. Mine
don't fit right anyway, since in the spirit of waste-not-wantnot
that rules 13, I was issued a pair someone had
outgrown. Apparently, one of us walks funny, because
they're broken in all wrong.
We hunt, like in the old days. Silent, needing no words
to communicate, because here in the woods we move as
two parts of one being. Anticipating each other's
movements, watching each other's backs. How long has it
been? Eight months? Nine? Since we had this freedom?
It's not exactly the same, given all that's happened and the
trackers on our ankles and the fact that I have to rest so
often. But it's about as close to happiness as I think I can
currently get.
The animals here are not nearly suspicious enough.
That extra moment it takes to place our unfamiliar scent
means their death. In an hour and a half, we've got a mixed
dozen--rabbits, squirrels, and turkeys--and decide to knock
off to spend the remaining time by a pond that must be fed
by an underground spring, since the water's cool and
sweet. When Gale offers to clean the game, I don't object. I
stick a few mint leaves on my tongue, close my eyes, and
lean back against a rock, soaking in the sounds, letting the
scorching afternoon sun burn my skin, almost at peace until
Gale's voice interrupts me. "Katniss, why do you care so
much about your prep team?"
I open my eyes to see if he's joking, but he's frowning
down at the rabbit he's skinning. "Why shouldn't I?"
"Hm. Let's see. Because they've spent the last year
prettying you up for slaughter?" he suggests.
"It's more complicated than that. I know them. They're
not evil or cruel. They're not even smart. Hurting them, it's
like hurting children. They don't see...I mean, they don't
know..." I get knotted up in my words.
"They don't know what, Katniss?" he says. "That
tributes--who are the actual children involved here, not your
trio of freaks--are forced to fight to the death? That you
were going into that arena for people's amusement? Was
that a big secret in the Capitol?"
"No. But they don't view it the way we do," I say.
"They're raised on it and--"
"Are you actually defending them?" He slips the skin
from the rabbit in one quick move.
That stings, because, in fact, I am, and it's ridiculous. I
struggle to find a logical position. "I guess I'm defending
anyone who's treated like that for taking a slice of bread.
Maybe it reminds me too much of what happened to you
over a turkey!"
Still, he's right. It does seem strange, my level of
concern over the prep team. I should hate them and want to
see them strung up. But they're so clueless, and they
belonged to Cinna, and he was on my side, right?
"I'm not looking for a fight," Gale says. "But I don't think
Coin was sending you some big message by punishing
them for breaking the rules here. She probably thought
you'd see it as a favor." He stuffs the rabbit in the sack and
rises. "We better get going if we want to make it back on
time."
I ignore his offer of a hand up and get to my feet
unsteadily. "Fine." Neither of us talks on the way back, but
once we're inside the gate, I think of something else.
"During the Quarter Quell, Octavia and Flavius had to quit
because they couldn't stop crying over me going back in.
And Venia could barely say good-bye."
"I'll try and keep that in mind as they...remake you,"
says Gale.
"Do," I say.
We hand the meat over to Greasy Sae in the kitchen.
She likes District 13 well enough, even though she thinks
the cooks are somewhat lacking in imagination. But a
woman who came up with a palatable wild dog and rhubarb
stew is bound to feel as if her hands are tied here.
Exhausted from hunting and my lack of sleep, I go
back to my compartment to find it stripped bare, only to
remember we've been moved because of Buttercup. I
make my way up to the top floor and find Compartment E. It
looks exactly like Compartment 307, except for the window-
-two feet wide, eight inches high--centered at the top of the
outside wall. There's a heavy metal plate that fastens over
it, but right now it's propped open, and a certain cat is
nowhere to be seen. I stretch out on my bed, and a shaft of
afternoon sunlight plays on my face. The next thing I know,
my sister is waking me for 18:00--Reflection.
Prim tells me they've been announcing the assembly
since lunch. The entire population, except those needed for
essential jobs, is required to attend. We follow directions to
the Collective, a huge room that easily holds the thousands
who show up. You can tell it was built for a larger gathering,
and perhaps it held one before the pox epidemic. Prim
quietly points out the widespread fallout from that disaster--
the pox scars on people's bodies, the slightly disfigured
children. "They've suffered a lot here," she says.
After this morning, I'm in no mood to feel sorry for 13.
"No more than we did in Twelve," I say. I see my mother
lead in a group of mobile patients, still wearing their
hospital nightgowns and robes. Finnick stands among
them, looking dazed but gorgeous. In his hands he holds a
piece of thin rope, less than a foot in length, too short for
even him to fashion into a usable noose. His fingers move
rapidly, automatically tying and unraveling various knots as
he gazes about. Probably part of his therapy. I cross to him
and say, "Hey, Finnick." He doesn't seem to notice, so I
nudge him to get his attention. "Finnick! How are you
doing?"
"Katniss," he says, gripping my hand. Relieved to see
a familiar face, I think. "Why are we meeting here?"
"I told Coin I'd be her Mockingjay. But I made her
promise to give the other tributes immunity if the rebels
won," I tell him. "In public, so there are plenty of witnesses."
"Oh. Good. Because I worry about that with Annie. That
she'll say something that could be construed as traitorous
without knowing it," says Finnick.
Annie. Uh-oh. Totally forgot her. "Don't worry, I took
care of it." I give Finnick's hand a squeeze and head
straight for the podium at the front of the room. Coin, who is
glancing over her statement, raises her eyebrows at me. "I
need you to add Annie Cresta to the immunity list," I tell her.
The president frowns slightly. "Who's that?"
"She's Finnick Odair's--" What? I don't really know
what to call her. "She's Finnick's friend. From District Four.
Another victor. She was arrested and taken to the Capitol
when the arena blew up."
"Oh, the mad girl. That's not really necessary," she
says. "We don't make a habit of punishing anyone that
frail."
I think of the scene I walked in on this morning. Of
Octavia huddled against the wall. Of how Coin and I must
have vastly different definitions of frailty. But I only say, "No?
Then it shouldn't be a problem to add Annie."
"All right," says the president, penciling in Annie's
name. "Do you want to be up here with me for the
announcement?" I shake my head. "I didn't think so. Better
hurry and lose yourself in the crowd. I'm about to begin." I
make my way back to Finnick.
Words are another thing not wasted in 13. Coin calls
the audience to attention and tells them I have consented to
be the Mockingjay, provided the other victors--Peeta,
Johanna, Enobaria, and Annie--will be granted full pardon
for any damage they do to the rebel cause. In the rumbling
of the crowd, I hear the dissent. I suppose no one doubted I
would want to be the Mockingjay. So naming a price--one
that spares possible enemies--angers them. I stand
indifferent to the hostile looks thrown my way.
The president allows a few moments of unrest, and
then continues in her brisk fashion. Only now the words
coming out of her mouth are news to me. "But in return for
this unprecedented request, Soldier Everdeen has
promised to devote herself to our cause. It follows that any
deviance from her mission, in either motive or deed, will be
viewed as a break in this agreement. The immunity would
be terminated and the fate of the four victors determined by
the law of District Thirteen. As would her own. Thank you."
In other words, I step out of line and we're all dead.
5
Another force to contend with. Another power player
who has decided to use me as a piece in her games,
although things never seem to go according to plan. First
there were the Gamemakers, making me their star and
then scrambling to recover from that handful of poisonous
berries. Then President Snow, trying to use me to put out
the flames of rebellion, only to have my every move become
inflammatory. Next, the rebels ensnaring me in the metal
claw that lifted me from the arena, designating me to be
their Mockingjay, and then having to recover from the shock
that I might not want the wings. And now Coin, with her
fistful of precious nukes and her well-oiled machine of a
district, finding it's even harder to groom a Mockingjay than
to catch one. But she has been the quickest to determine
that I have an agenda of my own and am therefore not to be
trusted. She has been the first to publicly brand me as a
threat.
I run my fingers through the thick layer of bubbles in my
tub. Cleaning me up is just a preliminary step to
determining my new look. With my acid-damaged hair,
sunburned skin, and ugly scars, the prep team has to make
me pretty and then damage, burn, and scar me in a more
attractive way.
"Remake her to Beauty Base Zero," Fulvia ordered
first thing this morning. "We'll work from there." Beauty
Base Zero turns out to be what a person would look like if
they stepped out of bed looking flawless but natural. It
means my nails are perfectly shaped but not polished. My
hair soft and shiny but not styled. My skin smooth and clear
but not painted. Wax the body hair and erase the dark
circles, but don't make any noticeable enhancements. I
suppose Cinna gave the same instructions the first day I
arrived as a tribute in the Capitol. Only that was different,
since I was a contestant. As a rebel, I thought I'd get to look
more like myself. But it seems a televised rebel has her
own standards to live up to.
After I rinse the lather from my body, I turn to find
Octavia waiting with a towel. She is so altered from the
woman I knew in the Capitol, stripped of the gaudy clothing,
the heavy makeup, the dyes and jewelry and knickknacks
she adorned her hair with. I remember how one day she
showed up with bright pink tresses studded with blinking
colored lights shaped like mice. She told me she had
several mice at home as pets. The thought repulsed me at
the time, since we consider mice vermin, unless cooked.
But perhaps Octavia liked them because they were small,
soft, and squeaky. Like her. As she pats me dry, I try to
become acquainted with the District 13 Octavia. Her real
hair turns out to be a nice auburn. Her face is ordinary but
has an undeniable sweetness. She's younger than I thought.
Maybe early twenties. Devoid of the three-inch decorative
nails, her fingers appear almost stubby, and they can't stop
trembling. I want to tell her it's okay, that I'll see that Coin
never hurts her again. But the multicolored bruises
flowering under her green skin only remind me how
impotent I am.
Flavius, too, appears washed out without his purple
lipstick and bright clothes. He's managed to get his orange
ringlets back in some sort of order, though. It's Venia who's
the least changed. Her aqua hair lies flat instead of in
spikes and you can see the roots growing in gray.
However, the tattoos were always her most striking
characteristic, and they're as golden and shocking as ever.
She comes and takes the towel from Octavia's hands.
"Katniss is not going to hurt us," she says quietly but
firmly to Octavia. "Katniss did not even know we were here.
Things will be better now." Octavia gives a slight nod but
doesn't dare look me in the eye.
It's no simple job getting me back to Beauty Base
Zero, even with the elaborate arsenal of products, tools,
and gadgets Plutarch had the foresight to bring from the
Capitol. My preps do pretty well until they try to address the
spot on my arm where Johanna dug out the tracker. None
of the medical team was focusing on looks when they
patched up the gaping hole. Now I have a lumpy, jagged
scar that ripples out over a space the size of an apple.
Usually, my sleeve covers it, but the way Cinna's
Mockingjay costume is designed, the sleeves stop just
above the elbow. It's such a concern that Fulvia and
Plutarch are called in to discuss it. I swear, the sight of it
triggers Fulvia's gag reflex. For someone who works with a
Gamemaker, she's awfully sensitive. But I guess she's used
to seeing unpleasant things only on a screen.
"Everyone knows I have a scar here," I say sullenly.
"Knowing it and seeing it are two different things,"
says Fulvia. "It's positively repulsive. Plutarch and I will think
of something during lunch."
"It'll be fine," says Plutarch with a dismissive wave of
his hand. "Maybe an armband or something."
Disgusted, I get dressed so I can head to the dining
hall. My prep team huddles in a little group by the door. "Are
they bringing your food here?" I ask.
"No," says Venia. "We're supposed to go to a dining
hall."
I sigh inwardly as I imagine walking into the dining hall,
trailed by these three. But people always stare at me
anyway. This will be more of the same. "I'll show you where
it is," I say. "Come on."
The covert glances and quiet murmurs I usually evoke
are nothing compared to the reaction brought on by the
sight of my bizarre-looking prep team. The gaping mouths,
the finger pointing, the exclamations. "Just ignore them," I
tell my prep team. Eyes downcast, with mechanical
movements, they follow me through the line, accepting
bowls of grayish fish and okra stew and cups of water.
We take seats at my table, beside a group from the
Seam. They show a little more restraint than the people
from 13 do, although it may just be from embarrassment.
Leevy, who was my neighbor back in 12, gives a cautious
hello to the preps, and Gale's mother, Hazelle, who must
know about their imprisonment, holds up a spoonful of the
stew. "Don't worry," she says. "Tastes better than it looks."
But it's Posy, Gale's five-year-old sister, who helps the
most. She scoots along the bench to Octavia and touches
her skin with a tentative finger. "You're green. Are you
sick?"
"It's a fashion thing, Posy. Like wearing lipstick," I say.
"It's meant to be pretty," whispers Octavia, and I can
see the tears threatening to spill over her lashes.
Posy considers this and says matter-of-factly, "I think
you'd be pretty in any color."
The tiniest of smiles forms on Octavia's lips. "Thank
you."
"If you really want to impress Posy, you'll have to dye
yourself bright pink," says Gale, thumping his tray down
beside me. "That's her favorite color." Posy giggles and
slides back down to her mother. Gale nods at Flavius's
bowl. "I wouldn't let that get cold. It doesn't improve the
consistency."
Everyone gets down to eating. The stew doesn't taste
bad, but there's a certain sliminess that's hard to get
around. Like you have to swallow every bite three times
before it really goes down.
Gale, who's not usually much of a talker during meals,
makes an effort to keep the conversation going, asking
about the makeover. I know it's his attempt at smoothing
things over. We argued last night after he suggested I'd left
Coin no choice but to counter my demand for the victors'
safety with one of her own. "Katniss, she's running this
district. She can't do it if it seems like she's caving in to
your will."
"You mean she can't stand any dissent, even if it's fair,"
I'd countered.
"I mean you put her in a bad position. Making her give
Peeta and the others immunity when we don't even know
what sort of damage they might cause," Gale had said.
"So I should've just gone with the program and let the
other tributes take their chances? Not that it matters,
because that's what we're all doing anyway!" That was
when I'd slammed the door in his face. I hadn't sat with him
at breakfast, and when Plutarch had sent him down to
training this morning, I'd let him go without a word. I know he
only spoke out of concern for me, but I really need him to be
on my side, not Coin's. How can he not know that?
After lunch, Gale and I are scheduled to go down to
Special Defense to meet Beetee. As we ride the elevator,
Gale finally says, "You're still angry."
"And you're still not sorry," I reply.
"I still stand by what I said. Do you want me to lie about
it?" he asks.
"No, I want you to rethink it and come up with the right
opinion," I tell him. But this just makes him laugh. I have to
let it go. There's no point in trying to dictate what Gale
thinks. Which, if I'm honest, is one reason I trust him.
The Special Defense level is situated almost as far
down as the dungeons where we found the prep team. It's a
beehive of rooms full of computers, labs, research
equipment, and testing ranges.
When we ask for Beetee, we're directed through the
maze until we reach an enormous plate-glass window.
Inside is the first beautiful thing I've seen in the District 13
compound: a replication of a meadow, filled with real trees
and flowering plants, and alive with hummingbirds. Beetee
sits motionless in a wheelchair at the center of the
meadow, watching a spring-green bird hover in midair as it
sips nectar from a large orange blossom. His eyes follow
the bird as it darts away, and he catches sight of us. He
gives a friendly wave for us to join him inside.
The air's cool and breathable, not humid and muggy as
I'd expected. From all sides comes the whir of tiny wings,
which I used to confuse with the sound of insects in our
woods at home. I have to wonder what sort of fluke allowed
such a pleasing place to be built here.
Beetee still has the pallor of someone in
convalescence, but behind those ill-fitting glasses, his eyes
are alight with excitement. "Aren't they magnificent?
Thirteen has been studying their aerodynamics here for
years. Forward and backward flight, and speeds up to sixty
miles per hour. If only I could build you wings like these,
Katniss!"
"Doubt I could manage them, Beetee," I laugh.
"Here one second, gone the next. Can you bring a
hummingbird down with an arrow?" he asks.
"I've never tried. Not much meat on them," I answer.
"No. And you're not one to kill for sport," he says. "I bet
they'd be hard to shoot, though."
"You could snare them maybe," Gale says. His face
takes on that distant look it wears when he's working
something out. "Take a net with a very fine mesh. Enclose
an area and leave a mouth of a couple square feet. Bait the
inside with nectar flowers. While they're feeding, snap the
mouth shut. They'd fly away from the noise but only
encounter the far side of the net."
"Would that work?" asks Beetee.
"I don't know. Just an idea," says Gale. "They might
outsmart it."
"They might. But you're playing on their natural instincts
to flee danger. Thinking like your prey...that's where you find
their vulnerabilities," says Beetee.
I remember something I don't like to think about. In
preparation for the Quell, I saw a tape where Beetee, who
was still a boy, connected two wires that electrocuted a
pack of kids who were hunting him. The convulsing bodies,
the grotesque expressions. Beetee, in the moments that
led up to his victory in those long-ago Hunger Games,
watched the others die. Not his fault. Only self-defense. We
were all acting only in self-defense....
Suddenly, I want to leave the hummingbird room
before somebody starts setting up a snare. "Beetee,
Plutarch said you had something for me."
"Right. I do. Your new bow." He presses a hand control
on the arm of the chair and wheels out of the room. As we
follow him through the twists and turns of Special Defense,
he explains about the chair. "I can walk a little now. It's just
that I tire so quickly. It's easier for me to get around this
way. How's Finnick doing?"
"He's...he's having concentration problems," I answer. I
don't want to say he had a complete mental meltdown.
"Concentration problems, eh?" Beetee smiles grimly.
"If you knew what Finnick's been through the last few years,
you'd know how remarkable it is he's still with us at all. Tell
him I've been working on a new trident for him, though, will
you? Something to distract him a little." Distraction seems
to be the last thing Finnick needs, but I promise to pass on
the message.
Four soldiers guard the entrance to the hall marked
Special Weaponry. Checking the schedules printed on our
forearms is just a preliminary step. We also have
fingerprint, retinal, and DNA scans, and have to step
through special metal detectors. Beetee has to leave his
wheelchair outside, although they provide him with another
once we're through security. I find the whole thing bizarre
because I can't imagine anyone raised in District 13 being
a threat the government would have to guard against. Have
these precautions been put in place because of the recent
influx of immigrants?
At the door of the armory, we encounter a second
round of identification checks--as if my DNA might have
changed in the time it took to walk twenty yards down the
hallway--and are finally allowed to enter the weapons
collection. I have to admit the arsenal takes my breath
away. Row upon row of firearms, launchers, explosives,
armored vehicles. "Of course, the Airborne Division is
housed separately," Beetee tells us.
"Of course," I say, as if this would be self-evident. I
don't know where a simple bow and arrow could possibly
find a place in all this high-tech equipment, but then we
come upon a wall of deadly archery weapons. I've played
with a lot of the Capitol's weapons in training, but none
designed for military combat. I focus my attention on a
lethal-looking bow so loaded down with scopes and
gadgetry, I'm certain I can't even lift it, let alone shoot it.
"Gale, maybe you'd like to try out a few of these," says
Beetee.
"Seriously?" Gale asks.
"You'll be issued a gun eventually for battle, of course.
But if you appear as part of Katniss's team in the propos,
one of these would look a little showier. I thought you might
like to find one that suits you," says Beetee.
"Yeah, I would." Gale's hands close around the very
bow that caught my attention a moment ago, and he hefts it
onto his shoulder. He points it around the room, peering
through the scope.
"That doesn't seem very fair to the deer," I say.
"Wouldn't be using it on deer, would I?" he answers.
"I'll be right back," says Beetee. He presses a code
into a panel, and a small doorway opens. I watch until he's
disappeared and the door's shut.
"So, it'd be easy for you? Using that on people?" I ask.
"I didn't say that." Gale drops the bow to his side. "But
if I'd had a weapon that could've stopped what I saw
happen in Twelve...if I'd had a weapon that could have kept
you out of the arena...I'd have used it."
"Me, too," I admit. But I don't know what to tell him
about the aftermath of killing a person. About how they
never leave you.
Beetee wheels back in with a tall, black rectangular
case awkwardly positioned between his footrest and his
shoulder. He comes to a halt and tilts it toward me. "For
you."
I set the case flat on the floor and undo the latches
along one side. The top opens on silent hinges. Inside the
case, on a bed of crushed maroon velvet, lies a stunning
black bow. "Oh," I whisper in admiration. I lift it carefully into
the air to admire the exquisite balance, the elegant design,
and the curve of the limbs that somehow suggests the
wings of a bird extended in flight. There's something else. I
have to hold very still to make sure I'm not imagining it. No,
the bow is alive in my hands. I press it against my cheek
and feel the slight hum travel through the bones of my face.
"What's it doing?" I ask.
"Saying hello," explains Beetee with a grin. "It heard
your voice."
"It recognizes my voice?" I ask.
"Only your voice," he tells me. "You see, they wanted
me to design a bow based purely on looks. As part of your
costume, you know? But I kept thinking, What a waste. I
mean, what if you do need it sometime? As more than a
fashion accessory? So I left the outside simple, and left the
inside to my imagination. Best explained in practice,
though. Want to try those out?"
We do. A target range has already been prepared for
us. The arrows that Beetee designed are no less
remarkable than the bow. Between the two, I can shoot with
accuracy over one hundred yards. The variety of arrows--
razor sharp, incendiary, explosive--turn the bow into a
multipurpose weapon. Each one is recognizable by a
distinctive colored shaft. I have the option of voice override
at any time, but have no idea why I would use it. To
deactivate the bow's special properties, I need only tell it
"Good night." Then it goes to sleep until the sound of my
voice wakes it again.
I'm in good spirits by the time I get back to the prep
team, leaving Beetee and Gale behind. I sit patiently
through the rest of the paint job and don my costume, which
now includes a bloody bandage over the scar on my arm to
indicate I've been in recent combat. Venia affixes my
mockingjay pin over my heart. I take up my bow and the
sheath of normal arrows that Beetee made, knowing they
would never let me walk around with the loaded ones. Then
we're out on the soundstage, where I seem to stand for
hours while they adjust makeup and lighting and smoke
levels. Eventually, the commands coming via intercom from
the invisible people in the mysterious glassed-in booth
become fewer and fewer. Fulvia and Plutarch spend more
time studying and less time adjusting me. Finally, there's
quiet on the set. For a full five minutes I am simply
considered. Then Plutarch says, "I think that does it."
I'm beckoned over to a monitor. They play back the last
few minutes of taping and I watch the woman on the screen.
Her body seems larger in stature, more imposing than
mine. Her face smudged but sexy. Her brows black and
drawn in an angle of defiance. Wisps of smoke--suggesting
she has either just been extinguished or is about to burst
into flames--rise from her clothes. I do not know who this
person is.
Finnick, who's been wandering around the set for a
few hours, comes up behind me and says with a hint of his
old humor, "They'll either want to kill you, kiss you, or be
you."
Everyone's so excited, so pleased with their work. It's
nearly time to break for dinner, but they insist we continue.
Tomorrow we'll focus on speeches and interviews and have
me pretend to be in rebel battles. Today they want just one
slogan, just one line that they can work into a short propo to
show to Coin.
"People of Panem, we fight, we dare, we end our
hunger for justice!" That's the line. I can tell by the way they
present it that they've spent months, maybe years, working
it out and are really proud of it. It seems like a mouthful to
me, though. And stiff. I can't imagine actually saying it in
real life--unless I was using a Capitol accent and making
fun of it. Like when Gale and I used to imitate Effie Trinket's
"May the odds be ever in your favor!" But Fulvia's right in
my face, describing a battle I've just been in, and how my
comrades-in-arms are all lying dead around me, and how,
to rally the living, I must turn to the camera and shout out the
line!
I'm hustled back to my place, and the smoke machine
kicks in. Someone calls for quiet, the cameras start rolling,
and I hear "Action!" So I hold my bow over my head and yell
with all the anger I can muster, "People of Panem, we fight,
we dare, we end our hunger for justice!"
There's dead silence on the set. It goes on. And on.
Finally, the intercom crackles and Haymitch's acerbic
laugh fills the studio. He contains himself just long enough
to say, "And that, my friends, is how a revolution dies."
6
The shock of hearing Haymitch's voice yesterday, of
learning that he was not only functional but had some
measure of control over my life again, enraged me. I left the
studio directly and refused to acknowledge his comments
from the booth today. Even so, I knew immediately he was
right about my performance.
It took the whole of this morning for him to convince the
others of my limitations. That I can't pull it off. I can't stand in
a television studio wearing a costume and makeup in a
cloud of fake smoke and rally the districts to victory. It's
amazing, really, how long I have survived the cameras. The
credit for that, of course, goes to Peeta. Alone, I can't be
the Mockingjay.
We gather around the huge table in Command. Coin
and her people. Plutarch, Fulvia, and my prep team. A
group from 12 that includes Haymitch and Gale, but also a
few others I can't explain, like Leevy and Greasy Sae. At
the last minute, Finnick wheels Beetee in, accompanied by
Dalton, the cattle expert from 10. I suppose that Coin has
assembled this strange assortment of people as witnesses
to my failure.
However, it's Haymitch who welcomes everyone, and
by his words I understand that they have come at his
personal invitation. This is the first time we've been in a
room together since I clawed him. I avoid looking at him
directly, but I catch a glimpse of his reflection in one of the
shiny control consoles along the wall. He looks slightly
yellow and has lost a lot of weight, giving him a shrunken
appearance. For a second, I'm afraid he's dying. I have to
remind myself that I don't care.
The first thing Haymitch does is to show the footage
we've just shot. I seem to have reached some new low
under Plutarch and Fulvia's guidance. Both my voice and
body have a jerky, disjointed quality, like a puppet being
manipulated by unseen forces.
"All right," Haymitch says when it's over. "Would
anyone like to argue that this is of use to us in winning the
war?" No one does. "That saves time. So, let's all be quiet
for a minute. I want everyone to think of one incident where
Katniss Everdeen genuinely moved you. Not where you
were jealous of her hairstyle, or her dress went up in flames
or she made a halfway decent shot with an arrow. Not
where Peeta was making you like her. I want to hear one
moment where she made you feel something real."
Quiet stretches out and I'm beginning to think it will
never end, when Leevy speaks up. "When she volunteered
to take Prim's place at the reaping. Because I'm sure she
thought she was going to die."
"Good. Excellent example," says Haymitch. He takes a
purple marker and writes on a notepad. "Volunteered for
sister at reaping." Haymitch looks around the table.
"Somebody else."
I'm surprised that the next speaker is Boggs, who I
think of as a muscular robot that does Coin's bidding.
"When she sang the song. While the little girl died."
Somewhere in my head an image surfaces of Boggs with a
young boy perched up on his hip. In the dining hall, I think.
Maybe he's not a robot after all.
"Who didn't get choked up at that, right?" says
Haymitch, writing it down.
"I cried when she drugged Peeta so she could go get
him medicine and when she kissed him good-bye!" blurts
out Octavia. Then she covers her mouth, like she's sure this
was a bad mistake.
But Haymitch only nods. "Oh, yeah. Drugs Peeta to
save his life. Very nice."
The moments begin to come thick and fast and in no
particular order. When I took Rue on as an ally. Extended
my hand to Chaff on interview night. Tried to carry Mags.
And again and again when I held out those berries that
meant different things to different people. Love for Peeta.
Refusal to give in under impossible odds. Defiance of the
Capitol's inhumanity.
Haymitch holds up the notepad. "So, the question is,
what do all of these have in common?"
"They were Katniss's," says Gale quietly. "No one told
her what to do or say."
"Unscripted, yes!" says Beetee. He reaches over and
pats my hand. "So we should just leave you alone, right?"
People laugh. I even smile a little.
"Well, that's all very nice but not very helpful," says
Fulvia peevishly. "Unfortunately, her opportunities for being
wonderful are rather limited here in Thirteen. So unless
you're suggesting we toss her into the middle of combat--"
"That's exactly what I'm suggesting," says Haymitch.
"Put her out in the field and just keep the cameras rolling."
"But people think she's pregnant," Gale points out.
"We'll spread the word that she lost the baby from the
electrical shock in the arena," Plutarch replies. "Very sad.
Very unfortunate."
The idea of sending me into combat is controversial.
But Haymitch has a pretty tight case. If I perform well only in
real-life circumstances, then into them I should go. "Every
time we coach her or give her lines, the best we can hope
for is okay. It has to come from her. That's what people are
responding to."
"Even if we're careful, we can't guarantee her safety,"
says Boggs. "She'll be a target for every--"
"I want to go," I break in. "I'm no help to the rebels
here."
"And if you're killed?" asks Coin.
"Make sure you get some footage. You can use that,
anyway," I answer.
"Fine," says Coin. "But let's take it one step at a time.
Find the least dangerous situation that can evoke some
spontaneity in you." She walks around Command, studying
the illuminated district maps that show the ongoing troop
positions in the war. "Take her into Eight this afternoon.
There was heavy bombing this morning, but the raid seems
to have run its course. I want her armed with a squad of
bodyguards. Camera crew on the ground. Haymitch, you'll
be airborne and in contact with her. Let's see what happens
there. Does anyone have any other comments?"
"Wash her face," says Dalton. Everyone turns to him.
"She's still a girl and you made her look thirty-five. Feels
wrong. Like something the Capitol would do."
As Coin adjourns the meeting, Haymitch asks her if he
can speak to me privately. The others leave except for
Gale, who lingers uncertainly by my side. "What are you
worried about?" Haymitch asks him. "I'm the one who
needs the bodyguard."
"It's okay," I tell Gale, and he goes. Then there's just the
hum of the instruments, the purr of the ventilation system.
Haymitch takes the seat across from me. "We're going
to have to work together again. So, go ahead. Just say it."
I think of the snarling, cruel exchange back on the
hovercraft. The bitterness that followed. But all I say is "I
can't believe you didn't rescue Peeta."
"I know," he replies.
There's a sense of incompleteness. And not because
he hasn't apologized. But because we were a team. We
had a deal to keep Peeta safe. A drunken, unrealistic deal
made in the dark of night, but a deal just the same. And in
my heart of hearts, I know we both failed.
"Now you say it," I tell him.
"I can't believe you let him out of your sight that night,"
says Haymitch.
I nod. That's it. "I play it over and over in my head. What
I could have done to keep him by my side without breaking
the alliance. But nothing comes to me."
"You didn't have a choice. And even if I could've made
Plutarch stay and rescue him that night, the whole
hovercraft would've gone down. We barely got out as it
was." I finally meet Haymitch's eyes. Seam eyes. Gray and
deep and ringed with the circles of sleepless nights. "He's
not dead yet, Katniss."
"We're still in the game." I try to say this with optimism,
but my voice cracks.
"Still in. And I'm still your mentor." Haymitch points his
marker at me. "When you're on the ground, remember I'm
airborne. I'll have the better view, so do what I tell you."
"We'll see," I answer.
I return to the Remake Room and watch the streaks of
makeup disappear down the drain as I scrub my face
clean. The person in the mirror looks ragged, with her
uneven skin and tired eyes, but she looks like me. I rip the
armband off, revealing the ugly scar from the tracker. There.
That looks like me, too.
Since I'll be in a combat zone, Beetee helps me with
armor Cinna designed. A helmet of some interwoven metal
that fits close to my head. The material's supple, like fabric,
and can be drawn back like a hood in case I don't want it up
full-time. A vest to reinforce the protection over my vital
organs. A small white earpiece that attaches to my collar by
a wire. Beetee secures a mask to my belt that I don't have
to wear unless there's a gas attack. "If you see anyone
dropping for reasons you can't explain, put it on
immediately," he says. Finally, he straps a sheath divided
into three cylinders of arrows to my back. "Just remember:
Right side, fire. Left side, explosive. Center, regular. You
shouldn't need them, but better safe than sorry."
Boggs shows up to escort me down to the Airborne
Division. Just as the elevator arrives, Finnick appears in a
state of agitation. "Katniss, they won't let me go! I told them
I'm fine, but they won't even let me ride in the hovercraft!"
I take in Finnick--his bare legs showing between his
hospital gown and slippers, his tangle of hair, the halfknotted
rope twisted around his fingers, the wild look in his
eyes--and know any plea on my part will be useless. Even I
don't think it's a good idea to bring him. So I smack my
hand on my forehead and say, "Oh, I forgot. It's this stupid
concussion. I was supposed to tell you to report to Beetee
in Special Weaponry. He's designed a new trident for you."
At the word trident, it's as if the old Finnick surfaces.
"Really? What's it do?"
"I don't know. But if it's anything like my bow and
arrows, you're going to love it," I say. "You'll need to train
with it, though."
"Right. Of course. I guess I better get down there," he
says.
"Finnick?" I say. "Maybe some pants?"
He looks down at his legs as if noticing his outfit for the
first time. Then he whips off his hospital gown, leaving him
in just his underwear. "Why? Do you find this"--he strikes a
ridiculously provocative pose--"distracting?"
I can't help laughing because it's funny, and it's extra
funny because it makes Boggs look so uncomfortable, and
I'm happy because Finnick actually sounds like the guy I
met at the Quarter Quell.
"I'm only human, Odair." I get in before the elevator
doors close. "Sorry," I say to Boggs.
"Don't be. I thought you...handled that well," he says.
"Better than my having to arrest him, anyway."
"Yeah," I say. I sneak a sidelong glance at him. He's
probably in his mid-forties, with close-cropped gray hair
and blue eyes. Incredible posture. He's spoken out twice
today in ways that make me think he would rather be
friends than enemies. Maybe I should give him a chance.
But he just seems so in step with Coin....
There's a series of loud clicks. The elevator comes to
a slight pause and then begins to move laterally to the left.
"It goes sideways?" I ask.
"Yes. There's a whole network of elevator paths under
Thirteen," he answers. "This one lies just above the
transport spoke to the fifth airlift platform. It's taking us to
the Hangar."
The Hangar. The dungeons. Special Defense.
Somewhere food is grown. Power generated. Air and
water purified. "Thirteen is even larger than I thought."
"Can't take credit for much of it," says Boggs. "We
basically inherited the place. It's been all we can do to keep
it running."
The clicks resume. We drop down again briefly--just a
couple of levels--and the doors open on the Hangar.
"Oh," I let out involuntarily at the sight of the fleet. Row
after row of different kinds of hovercraft. "Did you inherit
these, too?"
"Some we manufactured. Some were part of the
Capitol's air force. They've been updated, of course," says
Boggs.
I feel that twinge of hatred against 13 again. "So, you
had all this, and you left the rest of the districts defenseless
against the Capitol."
"It's not that simple," he shoots back. "We were in no
position to launch a counterattack until recently. We could
barely stay alive. After we'd overthrown and executed the
Capitol's people, only a handful of us even knew how to
pilot. We could've nuked them with missiles, yes. But
there's always the larger question: If we engage in that type
of war with the Capitol, would there be any human life left?"
"That sounds like what Peeta said. And you all called
him a traitor," I counter.
"Because he called for a cease-fire," says Boggs.
"You'll notice neither side has launched nuclear weapons.
We're working it out the old-fashioned way. Over here,
Soldier Everdeen." He indicates one of the smaller
hovercraft.
I mount the stairs and find it packed with the television
crew and equipment. Everyone else is dressed in 13's dark
gray military jumpsuits, even Haymitch, although he seems
unhappy about the snugness of his collar.
Fulvia Cardew hustles over and makes a sound of
frustration when she sees my clean face. "All that work,
down the drain. I'm not blaming you, Katniss. It's just that
very few people are born with camera-ready faces. Like
him." She snags Gale, who's in a conversation with
Plutarch, and spins him toward us. "Isn't he handsome?"
Gale does look striking in the uniform, I guess. But the
question just embarrasses us both, given our history. I'm
trying to think of a witty comeback, when Boggs says
brusquely, "Well, don't expect us to be too impressed. We
just saw Finnick Odair in his underwear." I decide to go
ahead and like Boggs.
There's a warning of the upcoming takeoff and I strap
myself into a seat next to Gale, facing off with Haymitch and
Plutarch. We glide through a maze of tunnels that opens out
onto a platform. Some sort of elevator device lifts the craft
slowly up through the levels. All at once we're outside in a
large field surrounded by woods, then we rise off the
platform and become wrapped in clouds.
Now that the flurry of activity leading up to this mission
is over, I realize I have no idea what I'm facing on this trip to
District 8. In fact, I know very little about the actual state of
the war. Or what it would take to win it. Or what would
happen if we did.
Plutarch tries to lay it out in simple terms for me. First
of all, every district is currently at war with the Capitol
except 2, which has always had a favored relationship with
our enemies despite its participation in the Hunger Games.
They get more food and better living conditions. After the
Dark Days and the supposed destruction of 13, District 2
became the Capitol's new center of defense, although it's
publicly presented as the home of the nation's stone
quarries, in the same way that 13 was known for graphite
mining. District 2 not only manufactures weaponry, it trains
and even supplies Peacekeepers.
"You mean...some of the Peacekeepers are born in
Two?" I ask. "I thought they all came from the Capitol."
Plutarch nods. "That's what you're supposed to think.
And some do come from the Capitol. But its population
could never sustain a force that size. Then there's the
problem of recruiting Capitol-raised citizens for a dull life of
deprivation in the districts. A twenty-year commitment to the
Peacekeepers, no marriage, no children allowed. Some
buy into it for the honor of the thing, others take it on as an
alternative to punishment. For instance, join the
Peacekeepers and your debts are forgiven. Many people
are swamped in debt in the Capitol, but not all of them are
fit for military duty. So District Two is where we turn for
additional troops. It's a way for their people to escape
poverty and a life in the quarries. They're raised with a
warrior mind-set. You've seen how eager their children are
to volunteer to be tributes."
Cato and Clove. Brutus and Enobaria. I've seen their
eagerness and their bloodlust, too. "But all the other
districts are on our side?" I ask.
"Yes. Our goal is to take over the districts one by one,
ending with District Two, thus cutting off the Capitol's supply
chain. Then, once it's weakened, we invade the Capitol
itself," says Plutarch. "That will be a whole other type of
challenge. But we'll cross that bridge when we come to it."
"If we win, who would be in charge of the government?"
Gale asks.
"Everyone," Plutarch tells him. "We're going to form a
republic where the people of each district and the Capitol
can elect their own representatives to be their voice in a
centralized government. Don't look so suspicious; it's
worked before."
"In books," Haymitch mutters.
"In history books," says Plutarch. "And if our ancestors
could do it, then we can, too."
Frankly, our ancestors don't seem much to brag about.
I mean, look at the state they left us in, with the wars and the
broken planet. Clearly, they didn't care about what would
happen to the people who came after them. But this
republic idea sounds like an improvement over our current
government.
"And if we lose?" I ask.
"If we lose?" Plutarch looks out at the clouds, and an
ironic smile twists his lips. "Then I would expect next year's
Hunger Games to be quite unforgettable. That reminds
me." He takes a vial from his vest, shakes a few deep violet
pills into his hand, and holds them out to us. "We named
them nightlock in your honor, Katniss. The rebels can't
afford for any of us to be captured now. But I promise, it will
be completely painless."
I take hold of a capsule, unsure of where to put it.
Plutarch taps a spot on my shoulder at the front of my left
sleeve. I examine it and find a tiny pocket that both secures
and conceals the pill. Even if my hands were tied, I could
lean my head forward and bite it free.
Cinna, it seems, has thought of everything.
7
The hovercraft makes a quick, spiral descent onto a
wide road on the outskirts of 8. Almost immediately, the
door opens, the stairs slide into place, and we're spit out
onto the asphalt. The moment the last person disembarks,
the equipment retracts. Then the craft lifts off and vanishes.
I'm left with a bodyguard made up of Gale, Boggs, and two
other soldiers. The TV crew consists of a pair of burly
Capitol cameramen with heavy mobile cameras encasing
their bodies like insect shells, a woman director named
Cressida who has a shaved head tattooed with green
vines, and her assistant, Messalla, a slim young man with
several sets of earrings. On careful observation, I see his
tongue has been pierced, too, and he wears a stud with a
silver ball the size of a marble.
Boggs hustles us off the road toward a row of
warehouses as a second hovercraft comes in for a landing.
This one brings crates of medical supplies and a crew of
six medics--I can tell by their distinctive white outfits. We all
follow Boggs down an alley that runs between two dull gray
warehouses. Only the occasional access ladder to the roof
interrupts the scarred metal walls. When we emerge onto
the street, it's like we've entered another world.
The wounded from this morning's bombing are being
brought in. On homemade stretchers, in wheelbarrows, on
carts, slung across shoulders, and clenched tight in arms.
Bleeding, limbless, unconscious. Propelled by desperate
people to a warehouse with a sloppily painted H above the
doorway. It's a scene from my old kitchen, where my mother
treated the dying, multiplied by ten, by fifty, by a hundred. I
had expected bombed-out buildings and instead find
myself confronted with broken human bodies.
This is where they plan on filming me? I turn to Boggs.
"This won't work," I say. "I won't be good here."
He must see the panic in my eyes, because he stops a
moment and places his hands on my shoulders. "You will.
Just let them see you. That will do more for them than any
doctor in the world could."
A woman directing the incoming patients catches sight
of us, does a sort of double take, and then strides over. Her
dark brown eyes are puffy with fatigue and she smells of
metal and sweat. A bandage around her throat needed
changing about three days ago. The strap of the automatic
weapon slung across her back digs into her neck and she
shifts her shoulder to reposition it. With a jerk of her thumb,
she orders the medics into the warehouse. They comply
without question.
"This is Commander Paylor of Eight," says Boggs.
"Commander, Soldier Katniss Everdeen."
She looks young to be a commander. Early thirties.
But there's an authoritative tone to her voice that makes you
feel her appointment wasn't arbitrary. Beside her, in my
spanking-new outfit, scrubbed and shiny, I feel like a
recently hatched chick, untested and only just learning how
to navigate the world.
"Yeah, I know who she is," says Paylor. "You're alive,
then. We weren't sure." Am I wrong or is there a note of
accusation in her voice?
"I'm still not sure myself," I answer.
"Been in recovery." Boggs taps his head. "Bad
concussion." He lowers his voice a moment. "Miscarriage.
But she insisted on coming by to see your wounded."
"Well, we've got plenty of those," says Paylor.
"You think this is a good idea?" says Gale, frowning at
the hospital. "Assembling your wounded like this?"
I don't. Any sort of contagious disease would spread
through this place like wildfire.
"I think it's slightly better than leaving them to die," says
Paylor.
"That's not what I meant," Gale tells her.
"Well, currently that's my other option. But if you come
up with a third and get Coin to back it, I'm all ears." Paylor
waves me toward the door. "Come on in, Mockingjay. And
by all means, bring your friends."
I glance back at the freak show that is my crew, steel
myself, and follow her into the hospital. Some sort of heavy,
industrial curtain hangs the length of the building, forming a
sizable corridor. Corpses lie side by side, curtain brushing
their heads, white cloths concealing their faces. "We've got
a mass grave started a few blocks west of here, but I can't
spare the manpower to move them yet," says Paylor. She
finds a slit in the curtain and opens it wide.
My fingers wrap around Gale's wrist. "Do not leave my
side," I say under my breath.
"I'm right here," he answers quietly.
I step through the curtain and my senses are
assaulted. My first impulse is to cover my nose to block out
the stench of soiled linen, putrefying flesh, and vomit, all
ripening in the heat of the warehouse. They've propped
open skylights that crisscross the high metal roof, but any
air that's managing to get in can't make a dent in the fog
below. The thin shafts of sunlight provide the only
illumination, and as my eyes adjust, I can make out row
upon row of wounded, in cots, on pallets, on the floor
because there are so many to claim the space. The drone
of black flies, the moaning of people in pain, and the sobs
of their attending loved ones have combined into a
wrenching chorus.
We have no real hospitals in the districts. We die at
home, which at the moment seems a far desirable
alternative to what lies in front of me. Then I remember that
many of these people probably lost their homes in the
bombings.
Sweat begins to run down my back, fill my palms. I
breathe through my mouth in an attempt to diminish the
smell. Black spots swim across my field of vision, and I
think there's a really good chance I could faint. But then I
catch sight of Paylor, who's watching me so closely, waiting
to see what I am made of, and if any of them have been
right to think they can count on me. So I let go of Gale and
force myself to move deeper into the warehouse, to walk
into the narrow strip between two rows of beds.
"Katniss?" a voice croaks out from my left, breaking
apart from the general din. "Katniss?" A hand reaches for
me out of the haze. I cling to it for support. Attached to the
hand is a young woman with an injured leg. Blood has
seeped through the heavy bandages, which are crawling
with flies. Her face reflects her pain, but something else,
too, something that seems completely incongruous with her
situation. "Is it really you?"
"Yeah, it's me," I get out.
Joy. That's the expression on her face. At the sound of
my voice, it brightens, erases the suffering momentarily.
"You're alive! We didn't know. People said you were,
but we didn't know!" she says excitedly.
"I got pretty banged up. But I got better," I say. "Just
like you will."
"I've got to tell my brother!" The woman struggles to sit
up and calls to someone a few beds down. "Eddy! Eddy!
She's here! It's Katniss Everdeen!"
A boy, probably about twelve years old, turns to us.
Bandages obscure half of his face. The side of his mouth I
can see opens as if to utter an exclamation. I go to him,
push his damp brown curls back from his forehead. Murmur
a greeting. He can't speak, but his one good eye fixes on
me with such intensity, as if he's trying to memorize every
detail of my face.
I hear my name rippling through the hot air, spreading
out into the hospital. "Katniss! Katniss Everdeen!" The
sounds of pain and grief begin to recede, to be replaced by
words of anticipation. From all sides, voices beckon me. I
begin to move, clasping the hands extended to me,
touching the sound parts of those unable to move their
limbs, saying hello, how are you, good to meet you. Nothing
of importance, no amazing words of inspiration. But it
doesn't matter. Boggs is right. It's the sight of me, alive, that
is the inspiration.
Hungry fingers devour me, wanting to feel my flesh. As
a stricken man clutches my face between his hands, I send
a silent thank-you to Dalton for suggesting I wash off the
makeup. How ridiculous, how perverse I would feel
presenting that painted Capitol mask to these people. The
damage, the fatigue, the imperfections. That's how they
recognize me, why I belong to them.
Despite his controversial interview with Caesar, many
ask about Peeta, assure me that they know he was
speaking under duress. I do my best to sound positive
about our future, but people are truly devastated when they
learn I've lost the baby. I want to come clean and tell one
weeping woman that it was all a hoax, a move in the game,
but to present Peeta as a liar now would not help his
image. Or mine. Or the cause.
I begin to fully understand the lengths to which people
have gone to protect me. What I mean to the rebels. My
ongoing struggle against the Capitol, which has so often felt
like a solitary journey, has not been undertaken alone. I
have had thousands upon thousands of people from the
districts at my side. I was their Mockingjay long before I
accepted the role.
A new sensation begins to germinate inside me. But it
takes until I am standing on a table, waving my final
goodbyes to the hoarse chanting of my name, to define it.
Power. I have a kind of power I never knew I possessed.
Snow knew it, as soon as I held out those berries. Plutarch
knew when he rescued me from the arena. And Coin knows
now. So much so that she must publicly remind her people
that I am not in control.
When we're outside again, I lean against the
warehouse, catching my breath, accepting the canteen of
water from Boggs. "You did great," he says.
Well, I didn't faint or throw up or run out screaming.
Mostly, I just rode the wave of emotion rolling through the
place.
"We got some nice stuff in there," says Cressida. I
look at the insect cameramen, perspiration pouring from
under their equipment. Messalla scribbling notes. I had
forgotten they were even filming me.
"I didn't do much, really," I say.
"You have to give yourself some credit for what you've
done in the past," says Boggs.
What I've done in the past? I think of the trail of
destruction in my wake--my knees weaken and I slide down
to a sitting position. "That's a mixed bag."
"Well, you're not perfect by a long shot. But times
being what they are, you'll have to do," says Boggs.
Gale squats down beside me, shaking his head. "I
can't believe you let all those people touch you. I kept
expecting you to make a break for the door."
"Shut up," I say with a laugh.
"Your mother's going to be very proud when she sees
the footage," he says.
"My mother won't even notice me. She'll be too
appalled by the conditions in there." I turn to Boggs and
ask, "Is it like this in every district?"
"Yes. Most are under attack. We're trying to get in aid
wherever we can, but it's not enough." He stops a minute,
distracted by something in his earpiece. I realize I haven't
heard Haymitch's voice once, and fiddle with mine,
wondering if it's broken. "We're to get to the airstrip.
Immediately," Boggs says, lifting me to my feet with one
hand. "There's a problem."
"What kind of problem?" asks Gale.
"Incoming bombers," says Boggs. He reaches behind
my neck and yanks Cinna's helmet up onto my head. "Let's
move!"
Unsure of what's going on, I take off running along the
front of the warehouse, heading for the alley that leads to
the airstrip. But I don't sense any immediate threat. The
sky's an empty, cloudless blue. The street's clear except for
the people hauling the wounded to the hospital. There's no
enemy, no alarm. Then the sirens begin to wail. Within
seconds, a low-flying V-shaped formation of Capitol
hoverplanes appears above us, and the bombs begin to
fall. I'm blown off my feet, into the front wall of the
warehouse. There's a searing pain just above the back of
my right knee. Something has struck my back as well, but
doesn't seem to have penetrated my vest. I try to get up, but
Boggs pushes me back down, shielding my body with his
own. The ground ripples under me as bomb after bomb
drops from the planes and detonates.
It's a horrifying sensation being pinned against the wall
as the bombs rain down. What was that expression my
father used for easy kills? Like shooting fish in a barrel.
We are the fish, the street the barrel.
"Katniss!" I'm startled by Haymitch's voice in my ear.
"What? Yes, what? I'm here!" I answer.
"Listen to me. We can't land during the bombing, but
it's imperative you're not spotted," he says.
"So they don't know I'm here?" I assumed, as usual, it
was my presence that brought on punishment.
"Intelligence thinks no. That this raid was already
scheduled," says Haymitch.
Now Plutarch's voice comes up, calm but forceful. The
voice of a Head Gamemaker used to calling the shots
under pressure. "There's a light blue warehouse three down
from you. It has a bunker in the far north corner. Can you get
there?"
"We'll do our best," says Boggs. Plutarch must be in
everyone's ear, because my bodyguards and crew are
getting up. My eye instinctively searches for Gale and sees
he's on his feet, apparently unharmed.
"You've got maybe forty-five seconds to the next
wave," says Plutarch.
I give a grunt of pain as my right leg takes the weight of
my body, but I keep moving. No time to examine the injury.
Better not to look now, anyway. Fortunately, I have on shoes
that Cinna designed. They grip the asphalt on contact and
spring free of it on release. I'd be hopeless in that ill-fitting
pair that 13 assigned to me. Boggs has the lead, but no
one else passes me. Instead they match my pace,
protecting my sides, my back. I force myself into a sprint as
the seconds tick away. We pass the second gray
warehouse and run along a dirt brown building. Up ahead, I
see a faded blue facade. Home of the bunker. We have just
reached another alley, need only to cross it to arrive at the
door, when the next wave of bombs begins. I instinctively
dive into the alley and roll toward the blue wall. This time it's
Gale who throws himself over me to provide one more layer
of protection from the bombing. It seems to go on longer
this time, but we are farther away.
I shift onto my side and find myself looking directly into
Gale's eyes. For an instant the world recedes and there is
just his flushed face, his pulse visible at his temple, his lips
slightly parted as he tries to catch his breath.
"You all right?" he asks, his words nearly drowned out
by an explosion.
"Yeah. I don't think they've seen me," I answer. "I mean,
they're not following us."
"No, they've targeted something else," says Gale.
"I know, but there's nothing back there but--" The
realization hits us at the same time.
"The hospital." Instantly, Gale's up and shouting to the
others. "They're targeting the hospital!"
"Not your problem," says Plutarch firmly. "Get to the
bunker."
"But there's nothing there but the wounded!" I say.
"Katniss." I hear the warning note in Haymitch's voice
and know what's coming. "Don't you even think about--!" I
yank the earpiece free and let it hang from its wire. With
that distraction gone, I hear another sound. Machine gun
fire coming from the roof of the dirt brown warehouse
across the alley. Someone is returning fire. Before anyone
can stop me, I make a dash for an access ladder and begin
to scale it. Climbing. One of the things I do best.
"Don't stop!" I hear Gale say behind me. Then there's
the sound of his boot on someone's face. If it belongs to
Boggs, Gale's going to pay for it dearly later on. I make the
roof and drag myself onto the tar. I stop long enough to pull
Gale up beside me, and then we take off for the row of
machine gun nests on the street side of the warehouse.
Each looks to be manned by a few rebels. We skid into a
nest with a pair of soldiers, hunching down behind the
barrier.
"Boggs know you're up here?" To my left I see Paylor
behind one of the guns, looking at us quizzically.
I try to be evasive without flat-out lying. "He knows
where we are, all right."
Paylor laughs. "I bet he does. You been trained in
these?" She slaps the stock of her gun.
"I have. In Thirteen," says Gale. "But I'd rather use my
own weapons."
"Yes, we've got our bows." I hold mine up, then realize
how decorative it must seem. "It's more deadly than it
looks."
"It would have to be," says Paylor. "All right. We expect
at least three more waves. They have to drop their sight
shields before they release the bombs. That's our chance.
Stay low!" I position myself to shoot from one knee.
"Better start with fire," says Gale.
I nod and pull an arrow from my right sheath. If we miss
our targets, these arrows will land somewhere--probably
the warehouses across the street. A fire can be put out, but
the damage an explosive can do may be irreparable.
Suddenly, they appear in the sky, two blocks down,
maybe a hundred yards above us. Seven small bombers in
a V formation. "Geese!" I yell at Gale. He'll know exactly
what I mean. During migration season, when we hunt fowl,
we've developed a system of dividing the birds so we don't
both target the same ones. I get the far side of the V, Gale
takes the near, and we alternate shots at the front bird.
There's no time for further discussion. I estimate the lead
time on the hoverplanes and let my arrow fly. I catch the
inside wing of one, causing it to burst into flames. Gale just
misses the point plane. A fire blooms on an empty
warehouse roof across from us. He swears under his
breath.
The hoverplane I hit swerves out of formation, but still
releases its bombs. It doesn't disappear, though. Neither
does one other I assume was hit by gunfire. The damage
must prevent the sight shield from reactivating.
"Good shot," says Gale.
"I wasn't even aiming for that one," I mutter. I'd set my
sights on the plane in front of it. "They're faster than we
think."
"Positions!" Paylor shouts. The next wave of
hoverplanes is appearing already.
"Fire's no good," Gale says. I nod and we both load
explosive-tipped arrows. Those warehouses across the
way look deserted anyway.
As the planes sweep silently in, I make another
decision. "I'm standing!" I shout to Gale, and rise to my feet.
This is the position I get the best accuracy from. I lead
earlier and score a direct hit on the point plane, blasting a
hole in its belly. Gale blows the tail off a second. It flips and
crashes into the street, setting off a series of explosions as
its cargo goes off.
Without warning, a third V formation unveils. This time,
Gale squarely hits the point plane. I take the wing off the
second bomber, causing it to spin into the one behind it.
Together they collide into the roof of the warehouse across
from the hospital. A fourth goes down from gunfire.
"All right, that's it," Paylor says.
Flames and heavy black smoke from the wreckage
obscure our view. "Did they hit the hospital?"
"Must have," she says grimly.
As I hurry toward the ladders at the far end of the
warehouse, the sight of Messalla and one of the insects
emerging from behind an air duct surprises me. I thought
they'd still be hunkered down in the alley.
"They're growing on me," says Gale.
I scramble down a ladder. When my feet hit the ground,
I find a bodyguard, Cressida, and the other insect waiting. I
expect resistance, but Cressida just waves me toward the
hospital. She's yelling, "I don't care, Plutarch! Just give me
five more minutes!" Not one to question a free pass, I take
off into the street.
"Oh, no," I whisper as I catch sight of the hospital. What
used to be the hospital. I move past the wounded, past the
burning plane wrecks, fixated on the disaster ahead of me.
People screaming, running about frantically, but unable to
help. The bombs have collapsed the hospital roof and set
the building on fire, effectively trapping the patients within.
A group of rescuers has assembled, trying to clear a path
to the inside. But I already know what they will find. If the
crushing debris and the flames didn't get them, the smoke
did.
Gale's at my shoulder. The fact that he does nothing
only confirms my suspicions. Miners don't abandon an
accident until it's hopeless.
"Come on, Katniss. Haymitch says they can get a
hovercraft in for us now," he tells me. But I can't seem to
move.
"Why would they do that? Why would they target
people who were already dying?" I ask him.
"Scare others off. Prevent the wounded from seeking
help," says Gale. "Those people you met, they were
expendable. To Snow, anyway. If the Capitol wins, what will
it do with a bunch of damaged slaves?"
I remember all those years in the woods, listening to
Gale rant against the Capitol. Me, not paying close
attention. Wondering why he even bothered to dissect its
motives. Why thinking like our enemy would ever matter.
Clearly, it could have mattered today. When Gale
questioned the existence of the hospital, he was not
thinking of disease, but this. Because he never
underestimates the cruelty of those we face.
I slowly turn my back to the hospital and find Cressida,
flanked by the insects, standing a couple of yards in front of
me. Her manner's unrattled. Cool even. "Katniss," she says,
"President Snow just had them air the bombing live. Then
he made an appearance to say that this was his way of
sending a message to the rebels. What about you? Would
you like to tell the rebels anything?"
"Yes," I whisper. The red blinking light on one of the
cameras catches my eye. I know I'm being recorded. "Yes,"
I say more forcefully. Everyone is drawing away from me--
Gale, Cressida, the insects--giving me the stage. But I stay
focused on the red light. "I want to tell the rebels that I am
alive. That I'm right here in District Eight, where the Capitol
has just bombed a hospital full of unarmed men, women,
and children. There will be no survivors." The shock I've
been feeling begins to give way to fury. "I want to tell people
that if you think for one second the Capitol will treat us fairly
if there's a cease-fire, you're deluding yourself. Because
you know who they are and what they do." My hands go out
automatically, as if to indicate the whole horror around me.
"This is what they do! And we must fight back!"
I'm moving in toward the camera now, carried forward
by my rage. "President Snow says he's sending us a
message? Well, I have one for him. You can torture us and
bomb us and burn our districts to the ground, but do you
see that?" One of the cameras follows as I point to the
planes burning on the roof of the warehouse across from
us. The Capitol seal on a wing glows clearly through the
flames. "Fire is catching!" I am shouting now, determined
that he will not miss a word. "And if we burn, you burn with
us!"
My last words hang in the air. I feel suspended in time.
Held aloft in a cloud of heat that generates not from my
surroundings, but from my own being.
"Cut!" Cressida's voice snaps me back to reality,
extinguishes me. She gives me a nod of approval. "That's a
wrap."
8
Boggs appears and gets a firm lock on my arm, but I'm
not planning on running now. I look over at the hospital--just
in time to see the rest of the structure give way--and the
fight goes out of me. All those people, the hundreds of
wounded, the relatives, the medics from 13, are no more. I
turn back to Boggs, see the swelling on his face left by
Gale's boot. I'm no expert, but I'm pretty sure his nose is
broken. His voice is more resigned than angry, though.
"Back to the landing strip." I obediently take a step forward
and wince as I become aware of the pain behind my right
knee. The adrenaline rush that overrode the sensation has
passed and my body parts join in a chorus of complaints.
I'm banged up and bloody and someone seems to be
hammering on my left temple from inside my skull. Boggs
quickly examines my face, then scoops me up and jogs for
the runway. Halfway there, I puke on his bulletproof vest. It's
hard to tell because he's short of breath, but I think he sighs.
A small hovercraft, different from the one that
transported us here, waits on the runway. The second my
team's on board, we take off. No comfy seats and windows
this time. We seem to be in some sort of cargo craft.
Boggs does emergency first aid on people to hold them
until we get back to 13. I want to take off my vest, since I got
a fair amount of vomit on it as well, but it's too cold to think
about it. I lie on the floor with my head in Gale's lap. The last
thing I remember is Boggs spreading a couple of burlap
sacks over me.
When I wake up, I'm warm and patched up in my old
bed in the hospital. My mother's there, checking my vital
signs. "How do you feel?"
"A little beat-up, but all right," I say.
"No one even told us you were going until you were
gone," she says.
I feel a pang of guilt. When your family's had to send
you off twice to the Hunger Games, this isn't the kind of
detail you should overlook. "I'm sorry. They weren't
expecting the attack. I was just supposed to be visiting the
patients," I explain. "Next time, I'll have them clear it with
you."
"Katniss, no one clears anything with me," she says.
It's true. Even I don't. Not since my father died. Why
pretend? "Well, I'll have them...notify you anyway."
On the bedside table is a piece of shrapnel they
removed from my leg. The doctors are more concerned
with the damage my brain might have suffered from the
explosions, since my concussion hadn't fully healed to
begin with. But I don't have double vision or anything and I
can think clearly enough. I've slept right through the late
afternoon and night, and I'm starving. My breakfast is
disappointingly small. Just a few cubes of bread soaking in
warm milk. I've been called down to an early morning
meeting at Command. I start to get up and then realize they
plan to roll my hospital bed directly there. I want to walk, but
that's out, so I negotiate my way into a wheelchair. I feel
fine, really. Except for my head, and my leg, and the
soreness from the bruises, and the nausea that hit a couple
minutes after I ate. Maybe the wheelchair's a good idea.
As they wheel me down, I begin to get uneasy about
what I will face. Gale and I directly disobeyed orders
yesterday, and Boggs has the injury to prove it. Surely,
there will be repercussions, but will they go so far as Coin
annulling our agreement for the victors' immunity? Have I
stripped Peeta of what little protection I could give him?
When I get to Command, the only ones who've arrived
are Cressida, Messalla, and the insects. Messalla beams
and says, "There's our little star!" and the others are smiling
so genuinely that I can't help but smile in return. They
impressed me in 8, following me onto the roof during the
bombing, making Plutarch back off so they could get the
footage they wanted. They more than do their work, they
take pride in it. Like Cinna.
I have a strange thought that if we were in the arena
together, I would pick them as allies. Cressida, Messalla,
and--and--"I have to stop calling you 'the insects,'" I blurt out
to the cameramen. I explain how I didn't know their names,
but their suits suggested the shelled creatures. The
comparison doesn't seem to bother them. Even without the
camera shells, they strongly resemble each other. Same
sandy hair, red beards, and blue eyes. The one with closebitten
nails introduces himself as Castor and the other,
who's his brother, as Pollux. I wait for Pollux to say hello, but
he just nods. At first I think he's shy or a man of few words.
But something tugs on me--the position of his lips, the extra
effort he takes to swallow--and I know before Castor tells
me. Pollux is an Avox. They have cut out his tongue and he
will never speak again. And I no longer have to wonder
what made him risk everything to help bring down the
Capitol.
As the room fills, I brace myself for a less congenial
reception. But the only people who register any kind of
negativity are Haymitch, who's always out of sorts, and a
sour-faced Fulvia Cardew. Boggs wears a flesh-colored
plastic mask from his upper lip to his brow--I was right
about the broken nose--so his expression's hard to read.
Coin and Gale are in the midst of some exchange that
seems positively chummy.
When Gale slides into the seat next to my wheelchair, I
say, "Making new friends?"
His eyes flicker to the president and back. "Well, one
of us has to be accessible." He touches my temple gently.
"How do you feel?"
They must have served stewed garlic and squash for
the breakfast vegetable. The more people who gather, the
stronger the fumes are. My stomach turns and the lights
suddenly seem too bright. "Kind of rocky," I say. "How are
you?"
"Fine. They dug out a couple of pieces of shrapnel. No
big deal," he says.
Coin calls the meeting to order. "Our Airtime Assault
has officially launched. For any of you who missed
yesterday's twenty-hundred broadcast of our first propo--or
the seventeen reruns Beetee has managed to air since--we
will begin by replaying it." Replaying it? So they not only got
usable footage, they've already slapped together a propo
and aired it repeatedly. My palms grow moist in
anticipation of seeing myself on television. What if I'm still
awful? What if I'm as stiff and pointless as I was in the
studio and they've just given up on getting anything better?
Individual screens slide up from the table, the lights dim
slightly, and a hush falls over the room.
At first, my screen is black. Then a tiny spark flickers in
the center. It blossoms, spreads, silently eating up the
blackness until the entire frame is ablaze with a fire so real
and intense, I imagine I feel the heat emanating from it. The
image of my mockingjay pin emerges, glowing red-gold.
The deep, resonant voice that haunts my dreams begins to
speak. Claudius Templesmith, the official announcer of the
Hunger Games, says, "Katniss Everdeen, the girl who was
on fire, burns on."
Suddenly, there I am, replacing the mockingjay,
standing before the real flames and smoke of District 8. "I
want to tell the rebels that I am alive. That I'm right here in
District Eight, where the Capitol has just bombed a
hospital full of unarmed men, women, and children. There
will be no survivors." Cut to the hospital collapsing in on
itself, the desperation of the onlookers as I continue in
voice-over. "I want to tell people that if you think for one
second the Capitol will treat us fairly if there's a cease-fire,
you're deluding yourself. Because you know who they are
and what they do." Back to me now, my hands lifting up to
indicate the outrage around me. "This is what they do! And
we must fight back!" Now comes a truly fantastic montage
of the battle. The initial bombs falling, us running, being
blown to the ground--a close-up of my wound, which looks
good and bloody--scaling the roof, diving into the nests,
and then some amazing shots of the rebels, Gale, and
mostly me, me, me knocking those planes out of the sky.
Smash-cut back to me moving in on the camera.
"President Snow says he's sending us a message? Well, I
have one for him. You can torture us and bomb us and
burn our districts to the ground, but do you see that?"
We're with the camera, tracking to the planes burning on
the roof of the warehouse. Tight on the Capitol seal on a
wing, which melts back into the image of my face, shouting
at the president. "Fire is catching! And if we burn, you burn
with us!" Flames engulf the screen again. Superimposed
on them in black, solid letters are the words:
IF WE BURN YOU
BURN WITH US
The words catch fire and the whole screen burns to
blackness.
There's a moment of silent relish, then applause
followed by demands to see it again. Coin indulgently hits
the replay button, and this time, since I know what will
happen, I try to pretend that I'm watching this on my
television at home in the Seam. An anti-Capitol statement.
There's never been anything like it on television. Not in my
lifetime, anyway.
By the time the screen burns to black a second time, I
need to know more. "Did it play all over Panem? Did they
see it in the Capitol?"
"Not in the Capitol," says Plutarch. "We couldn't
override their system, although Beetee's working on it. But
in all the districts. We even got it on in Two, which may be
more valuable than the Capitol at this point in the game."
"Is Claudius Templesmith with us?" I ask.
This gives Plutarch a good laugh. "Only his voice. But
that's ours for the taking. We didn't even have to do any
special editing. He said that actual line in your first Games."
He slaps his hand on the table. "What say we give another
round of applause to Cressida, her amazing team, and, of
course, our on-camera talent!"
I clap, too, until I realize I'm the on-camera talent and
maybe it's obnoxious that I'm applauding for myself, but no
one's paying attention. I can't help noticing the strain on
Fulvia's face, though. I think how hard this must be for her,
watching Haymitch's idea succeed under Cressida's
direction, when Fulvia's studio approach was such a flop.
Coin seems to have reached the end of her tolerance
for self-congratulation. "Yes, well deserved. The result is
more than we had hoped for. But I do have to question the
wide margin of risk that you were willing to operate within. I
know the raid was unforeseen. However, given the
circumstances, I think we should discuss the decision to
send Katniss into actual combat."
The decision? To send me into combat? Then she
doesn't know that I flagrantly disregarded orders, ripped out
my earpiece, and gave my bodyguards the slip? What else
have they kept from her?
"It was a tough call," says Plutarch, furrowing his brow.
"But the general consensus was that we weren't going to
get anything worth using if we locked her in a bunker
somewhere every time a gun went off."
"And you're all right with that?" asks the president.
Gale has to kick me under the table before I realize
that she's talking to me. "Oh! Yeah, I'm completely all right
with that. It felt good. Doing something for a change."
"Well, let's be just a little more judicious with her
exposure. Especially now that the Capitol knows what she
can do," says Coin. There's a rumble of assent from around
the table.
No one has ratted out Gale and me. Not Plutarch,
whose authority we ignored. Not Boggs with his broken
nose. Not the insects we led into fire. Not Haymitch--no,
wait a minute. Haymitch is giving me a deadly smile and
saying sweetly, "Yeah, we wouldn't want to lose our little
Mockingjay when she's finally begun to sing." I make a note
to myself not to end up alone in a room with him, because
he's clearly having vengeful thoughts over that stupid
earpiece.
"So, what else do you have planned?" asks the
president.
Plutarch nods to Cressida, who consults a clipboard.
"We have some terrific footage of Katniss at the hospital in
Eight. There should be another propo in that with the theme
'Because you know who they are and what they do.' We'll
focus on Katniss interacting with the patients, particularly
the children, the bombing of the hospital, and the wreckage.
Messalla's cutting that together. We're also thinking about a
Mockingjay piece. Highlight some of Katniss's best
moments intercut with scenes of rebel uprisings and war
footage. We call that one 'Fire is catching.' And then Fulvia
came up with a really brilliant idea."
Fulvia's mouthful-of-sour-grapes expression is startled
right off her face, but she recovers. "Well, I don't know how
brilliant it is, but I was thinking we could do a series of
propos called We Remember. In each one, we would
feature one of the dead tributes. Little Rue from Eleven or
old Mags from Four. The idea being that we could target
each district with a very personal piece."
"A tribute to your tributes, as it were," says Plutarch.
"That is brilliant, Fulvia," I say sincerely. "It's the perfect
way to remind people why they're fighting."
"I think it could work," she says. "I thought we might use
Finnick to intro and narrate the spots. If there was interest in
them."
"Frankly, I don't see how we could have too many We
Remember propos," says Coin. "Can you start producing
them today?"
"Of course," says Fulvia, obviously mollified by the
response to her idea.
Cressida has smoothed everything over in the creative
department with her gesture. Praised Fulvia for what is, in
fact, a really good idea, and cleared the way to continue her
own on-air depiction of the Mockingjay. What's interesting
is that Plutarch seems to have no need to share in the
credit. All he wants is for the Airtime Assault to work. I
remember that Plutarch is a Head Gamemaker, not a
member of the crew. Not a piece in the Games. Therefore,
his worth is not defined by a single element, but by the
overall success of the production. If we win the war, that's
when Plutarch will take his bow. And expect his reward.
The president sends everyone off to get to work, so
Gale wheels me back to the hospital. We laugh a little
about the cover-up. Gale says no one wanted to look bad
by admitting they couldn't control us. I'm kinder, saying they
probably didn't want to jeopardize the chance of taking us
out again now that they've gotten some decent footage.
Both things are probably true. Gale has to go meet Beetee
down in Special Weaponry, so I doze off.
It seems like I've only shut my eyes for a few minutes,
but when I open them, I flinch at the sight of Haymitch sitting
a couple of feet from my bed. Waiting. Possibly for several
hours if the clock is right. I think about hollering for a
witness, but I'm going to have to face him sooner or later.
Haymitch leans forward and dangles something on a
thin white wire in front of my nose. It's hard to focus on, but
I'm pretty sure what it is. He drops it to the sheets. "That is
your earpiece. I will give you exactly one more chance to
wear it. If you remove it from your ear again, I'll have you
fitted with this." He holds up some sort of metal headgear
that I instantly name the head shackle. "It's an alternative
audio unit that locks around your skull and under your chin
until it's opened with a key. And I'll have the only key. If for
some reason you're clever enough to disable it"--Haymitch
dumps the head shackle on the bed and whips out a tiny
silver chip--"I'll authorize them to surgically implant this
transmitter into your ear so that I may speak to you twentyfour
hours a day."
Haymitch in my head full-time. Horrifying. "I'll keep the
earpiece in," I mutter.
"Excuse me?" he says.
"I'll keep the earpiece in!" I say, loud enough to wake
up half the hospital.
"You sure? Because I'm equally happy with any of the
three options," he tells me.
"I'm sure," I say. I scrunch up the earpiece wire
protectively in my fist and fling the head shackle back in his
face with my free hand, but he catches it easily. Probably
was expecting me to throw it. "Anything else?"
Haymitch rises to go. "While I was waiting...I ate your
lunch." My eyes take in the empty stew bowl and tray on my
bed table. "I'm going to report you," I mumble into my pillow.
"You do that, sweetheart." He goes out, safe in the
knowledge that I'm not the reporting kind.
I want to go back to sleep, but I'm restless. Images
from yesterday begin to flood into the present. The
bombing, the fiery plane crashes, the faces of the wounded
who no longer exist. I imagine death from all sides. The last
moment before seeing a shell hit the ground, feeling the
wing blown from my plane and the dizzying nosedive into
oblivion, the warehouse roof falling down at me while I'm
pinned helplessly to my cot. Things I saw, in person or on
the tape. Things I caused with a pull of my bowstring.
Things I will never be able to erase from my memory.
At dinner, Finnick brings his tray to my bed so we can
watch the newest propo together on television. He was
assigned quarters on my old floor, but he has so many
mental relapses, he still basically lives in the hospital. The
rebels air the "Because you know who they are and what
they do" propo that Messalla edited. The footage is intercut
with short studio clips of Gale, Boggs, and Cressida
describing the incident. It's hard to watch my reception in
the hospital in 8 since I know what's coming. When the
bombs rain down on the roof, I bury my face in my pillow,
looking up again at a brief clip of me at the end, after all the
victims are dead.
At least Finnick doesn't applaud or act all happy when
it's done. He just says, "People should know that
happened. And now they do."
"Let's turn it off, Finnick, before they run it again," I urge
him. But as Finnick's hand moves toward the remote
control, I cry, "Wait!" The Capitol is introducing a special
segment and something about it looks familiar. Yes, it's
Caesar Flickerman. And I can guess who his guest will be.
Peeta's physical transformation shocks me. The
healthy, clear-eyed boy I saw a few days ago has lost at
least fifteen pounds and developed a nervous tremor in his
hands. They've still got him groomed. But underneath the
paint that cannot cover the bags under his eyes, and the
fine clothes that cannot conceal the pain he feels when he
moves, is a person badly damaged.
My mind reels, trying to make sense of it. I just saw
him! Four--no, five--I think it was five days ago. How has he
deteriorated so rapidly? What could they possibly have
done to him in such a short time? Then it hits me. I replay in
my mind as much as I can of his first interview with Caesar,
searching for anything that would place it in time. There is
nothing. They could have taped that interview a day or two
after I blew up the arena, then done whatever they wanted
to do to him ever since. "Oh, Peeta..." I whisper.
Caesar and Peeta have a few empty exchanges
before Caesar asks him about rumors that I'm taping
propos for the districts. "They're using her, obviously," says
Peeta. "To whip up the rebels. I doubt she even really
knows what's going on in the war. What's at stake."
"Is there anything you'd like to tell her?" asks Caesar.
"There is," says Peeta. He looks directly into the
camera, right into my eyes. "Don't be a fool, Katniss. Think
for yourself. They've turned you into a weapon that could be
instrumental in the destruction of humanity. If you've got any
real influence, use it to put the brakes on this thing. Use it to
stop the war before it's too late. Ask yourself, do you really
trust the people you're working with? Do you really know
what's going on? And if you don't...find out."
Black screen. Seal of Panem. Show over.
Finnick presses the button on the remote that kills the
power. In a minute, people will be here to do damage
control on Peeta's condition and the words that came out of
his mouth. I will need to repudiate them. But the truth is, I
don't trust the rebels or Plutarch or Coin. I'm not confident
that they tell me the truth. I won't be able to conceal this.
Footsteps are approaching.
Finnick grips me hard by the arms. "We didn't see it."
"What?" I ask.
"We didn't see Peeta. Only the propo on Eight. Then
we turned the set off because the images upset you. Got
it?" he asks. I nod. "Finish your dinner." I pull myself
together enough so that when Plutarch and Fulvia enter, I
have a mouthful of bread and cabbage. Finnick is talking
about how well Gale came across on camera. We
congratulate them on the propo. Make it clear it was so
powerful, we tuned out right afterward. They look relieved.
They believe us.
No one mentions Peeta.